THROUGH THE SCREENED WINDOWS of her bedroom she can hear them, hundreds, maybe thousands of them munching on the leaves of her oaks and maples and other trees she cannot name, even though she has lived in these woods for over twenty years. It’s after midnight, and beside her in the darkness Michael sleeps, his big hairless chest rising and falling. When they made love earlier, his smooth back had felt like rubber to her and she imagined that he was not real, that this man she’s been seeing for over a year now is just some device she bought to ease her loneliness, to ground her away from the nagging sense that she’s hanging as still in the air as a nightgown on a branch.

Some nights she asks him to go sleep at his own place, and she wished she’d asked him that tonight too. If only so can be alone as she listens to the gypsy caterpillars decimate her trees. Their tiny waste rains down through the branches, and she does not know why she wants to listen to this, but she does.

It is late May and the air coming through the screens is cool. She can smell her magnolias and cherry blossoms but also the broken green of leaves that had only just begun their season, and now a hot anger opens up in her at these tiny fuckers that her husband Kai had warned her were coming again. It had been almost nine years since the last generation of them, and Kai had missed the signs then but not this time.

For weeks last fall, after not having seen him in over a year, there he was across the street in the deeply wooded acres they both own, though he seems to have claimed them for himself. He was moving through the trees, wrapping the lower trunks of all the hardwoods in burlap so that when the eggs became caterpillars in the spring it would slow their climb, which would then give him enough time to go from tree to tree brushing them into a bucket of water, where he would drown them.

He told her this as they stood together at the end of the dirt driveway. It was a gray Sunday afternoon, the air cold and smelling like dead leaves and pine needles and smoke from a distant neighbor’s brushfire. She had not seen or talked to him in so long, and part of her wished that he’d stayed in his condo downtown and not come back here, though she could not deny that it was good to see him. He held a fold of burlap under one arm, a roll of duct tape dangling from one finger. In his other hand was a box cutter, its razor blade protruding from the handle. Across her husband’s cheeks were two or three days of white stubble, and she happened to know that his sixty-fourth birthday was days away, but she said nothing about that.

“You should do that with your trees too, Teresa.” He nodded in the direction of the woods behind her, but he was staring at her as if his choice of words had been generous. And was he actually reminding her that his money had bought their land? He’d better not. Oh he’d fucking better not. But then he broke into that half smile he’d been giving her for over forty years, the one that said You can do it; I know you can.

He turned and waved goodbye with his razor blade, then walked slowly back to their Airstream kept so deep in the woods that no one can see it from the road, even in winter.

But now he seems to be living in that Airstream, and she doesn’t like it. Some days after work, her car idling beside her, she pulls her bills from her mailbox and sees him shirtless through the trees, just flashes of bare flesh in the mottled light as he goes from tree to tree, drowning the gypsies.

He has always gone without a shirt whenever he can, and though he never wears bug spray, the mosquitoes and even the ticks seem to stay away from him. People too. It’s what drew her to him all those decades ago, that other sixteen- and seventeen-year-olds seemed afraid of this strange boy who liked to scratch the shapes of animals into asphalt with broken glass, this boy who made his own shirt, sewing it out of white linen used for tablecloths. The sleeves were too long and the torso too loose, but with his thick curly hair and lean body it made him look like a stowaway on some ancient ship, and Terry could never stop looking at him whenever he walked by.

One afternoon just beyond the high school parking lot, one of the varsity wrestlers, an Armenian boy whose neck was wider than his skull, beat up the strange boy Kai because the wrestler’s girlfriend said he was cute. Terry saw it from the bus, the wrestler punching Kai in the face, his head snapping back, his hands in his jean pockets, a wide smile across Kai’s bloody lips.

The munching outside continues. From between her legs comes a trickle from Michael, and she slides out of bed and moves through the darkness to her bathroom. Through the open window over the toilet the leaf munching is so close she can probably reach out there and shake them off a limb. But it’s too late. She knows this. She should be mad at Kai for not offering to help her last fall, but she’s not, and as she slides back into bed there comes, once again, the knowledge that despite everything, she’s still waiting for things to go back to the way they were, for she still loves him. She does.



Her first patient of the day is Phyllis, a ninety-one-year-old widow recovering from hip surgery. Her apartment is in a complex that looks very much like where Terry worked as a nurse for over twenty years: three stories of brick and safety glass, each unit a cell made to look like home. On Phyllis’s window shelf are knickknacks of three golden retrievers to match the three that Phyllis and her family owned in life, and on the top shelf of a bookcase are photos of her eleven grandchildren, beneath them stacks of People magazine going back to the 1980s. Her sofa arms are covered with faded doilies, one with an old cigarette burn, and on the wall above is a framed oval portrait of her and her husband.

It’s a touched-up color photograph of them at their fiftieth anniversary party, and in it Phyllis’s hair is in a silver bouffant, a white rose pinned to her blouse, her smile deep and genuine. Her husband has his own rose pinned to the lapel of his suit, and he towers over her, a big man with a warm smile but also with eyes that seem to be looking ahead to whatever has to happen next.

So many of the people Terry has taken care of over the years are left to die alone or in the company of people paid to watch over them. Often on her daily walks, nothing in her own hand but a water bottle, Terry can still feel their individual hands gripping hers, the final, sometimes terrified squeeze before their fingers ultimately just, and must, let go.

But Phyllis is not one of these abandoned ones, and as Terry pulls on her mask and presses the foyer bell, she hopes that none of Phyllis’s relatives will be visiting this morning. Tuesdays are Terry’s long day, and she needs to pace herself while being as efficient as possible. Tuesdays also hold Brendan in it, her last patient of the day, this young man with a bullet hole in his chest he put there himself.

Phyllis opens the door before Terry can knock on it. “Come on in, honey. Come in.” It’s just after nine, but the old woman’s hair is brushed and sprayed, her face made up as if she’s been up for hours, which she probably has. She should have her own mask on, but she refuses to wear it inside her home, and she’s still in her nightgown so that Terry can check her dressing. From behind her mask Terry tells her that she looks lovely.

“Oh please, fifty years ago, maybe.” The old woman swings her walker around and heads back into her apartment. Terry closes the door behind her, and as Phyllis rolls the walker ahead of her, Terry keeps an eye on her. The carpet is the commercial grade of institutions and while it has always depressed Terry, she’s glad for it in this case.

There are the smells of freshly brewed coffee and warm cinnamon. “I ran out of the Entenmann’s, but I toasted you one of those Pop-Tarts. You like those, right?”

“I shouldn’t, Phyl, but yes, I do. Thank you.”

Terry sets her bag on the magazines scattered across the coffee table. She pulls out her box of latex gloves and her blood pressure cuff, her thermometer and soap dispenser, her ziplocked washcloths and sterilized plastic bowl. Phyllis is gripping her walker at the window while looking out at the oaks on the other side of the lidded dumpsters. Terry says, “I’ve got gypsy moths at my place, Phyl. They’re killing my trees.”

“Oh honey, you need to kill them. Didn’t you see the eggs?”

“My husband did.” She should be saying ex-husband, but neither one of them has filed those papers, have they?

“He still living across the street from you?”

Terry shouldn’t have told Phyllis about that, but as she moves into the old woman’s narrow kitchenette and turns on the hot water, Terry reminds herself that so much of this job, after all, is having conversations with people who just need to talk, and that day she needed to talk, though she needs to do better next time.

She squirts soap into her hands and scrubs, then leaves the water running and pulls free a paper towel. It’s on one of those wooden spindles standing up straight, the top of the spindle a duck with a bright-yellow bill. Phyllis is still talking out in her living room, and Terry fills her bowl with hot water and more squirts of soap.

“That means he still wants you.”

“I wouldn’t read too much into it, Phyl. He just loves the woods.”

“He can find the woods anywhere, honey.”

Terry shuts off the tap and carries her bowl of soapy water into the living room. She makes room for it on the coffee table, pulls on her latex gloves, and squats beside Phyllis. She’s about to ask her to lift her nightgown, but the old woman is already doing it.

What is remarkable about the human body is everything.

Phyllis is in her ninety-second year, but the skin of her upper thigh could be that of a fifty-year-old’s. The adhesive bandage over Phyllis’s wound is brown against her paleness, and when Terry touches it with two fingertips it’s no warmer than it should be.

“Any pain?”

“No more than the last one.”

“Good. Very good.” She pulls away the adhesive bandage, Phyllis’s incision showing itself one inch at a time, a long raised zipper of flesh. Terry grabs one of her washcloths and dips it into the hot soap and water, squeezing it once before dabbing at Phyllis’s stitches, then cleaning all around them. Phyllis has dropped the subject of Kai living across the street and is now asking about Terry’s kids.

“Your son still like music?”

“He’d better, he’s doing it professionally now.”

“And your daughter? Leah, right?

It moves Terry that Phyllis remembers this, and once again she thinks of Leah the last time she saw her just after dawn last August. Terry was still in her robe, the sunlight beginning to filter down through the trees, the small stones of their gravel driveway looking almost blue. But this is something she would only take in after Leah and her partner—that’s the word they both insisted on—had driven off in their packed Subaru wagon, their kayaks and Thule strapped to the roof.

Leah’s smile before she hugged her mother was warm and vulnerable, apologetic, even, for she knew that her mother was not wild about her daughter dropping out of graduate school to move to Costa Rica with Ted, who used the pronoun they, though they had the hips and breasts of the thirty-two-year-old woman she seemed to be. Terry tried to be open-minded about this. She did. And she wanted to like Ted, but throughout the two nights and three days she’d spent with this person it became clear that Ted was openly ambiguous about their gender but very little else: human beings should eat only a vegan diet, period; anyone who used even one plastic water bottle should be fined; Barack Obama was a serial killer whose weapon of choice was drones; Leah was happiest when she wasn’t “stressed out.” Challenged, is what Terry sat at the dinner table thinking.

The candles were burning down, her wineglass was empty, and Leah kept looking from her mother to Ted then back at her mother as if Leah were no longer twenty-nine years old and a bright young woman who’d just been studying environmental economics in New York City but the six-year-old girl she was just days ago, it had seemed, this loving child who forever seemed afraid of disappointing her mother.

“I think I was too hard on her growing up.”

“Hey, parents today aren’t hard enough. Why do you say that?”

“I don’t know.” But as Terry takes a fresh washcloth and dries the old woman’s incision, she does know why she says this. She was too hard on her daughter, especially when Leah entered puberty—or puberty entered her—and Leah, fourteen or fifteen, would be leaving the house in skin-tight yoga pants, every contour and fold of her lovely young body so clearly showing itself, and Terry would hear herself say, “Put a skirt on over that, Leah. My God, you look naked from the waist down.”

Sometimes Leah would act as if she hadn’t heard her mother and walk right out the front door, Terry following her and yelling for her to come back inside and do as she said. But mostly, Leah would look at her mother like she was from a time that had faded away long ago but should have faded away much sooner, and without a word she’d walk back upstairs to her room, where she’d change her clothes or simply shut the door and not go out at all.

Phyllis has been talking about one of her own kids, her “troubled” one. “If my Bill and I hadn’t cracked the whip on him, I don’t think he would have made it. I really don’t.”

Terry seals the old dressing into a ziplock bag, rips open a new adhesive bandage, and presses it to Phyllis’s hip. She centers the incision beneath the gauze and pushes the sticky borders against her skin, then pulls down the hem of Phyllis’s nightgown and helps her over to the sofa, gripping her hand as the old woman lowers herself carefully onto the center cushion.

Terry takes her temperature, which is wonderfully normal, and while she wraps the blood pressure cuff around Phyllis’s upper arm and starts squeezing the bulb, her stethoscope in her ears, Terry sees her daughter at seventeen, two new silver studs in her lower lip, a mutilation that Terry said made her look like some unloved street person, and Leah was yelling, “You’re trying to make me a mini you, Mom! Well, I’m me, okay? Not you, me!”

Phyllis’s blood pressure is a bit high but to be expected. Terry writes down those numbers and Phyllis’s temp in the pocket-size notebook Terry keeps in her purse. Younger visiting nurses enter all their patients’ information into their iPads, which makes it easier to share with doctors later, but Terry has never trusted the privacy of those devices, and she just won’t do it.

“Aren’t you going to eat that Pop-Tart, hon? And there’s coffee.”

“I’ll have to take it with me, Phyl. Thank you, though. You’re doing great.”

The old woman smiles up at her, and while Terry packs up her things Phyllis returns to the subject of Terry’s husband living just across the street.

“Maybe you two just needed a break. Have you thought of that?”

Yes, and no, not really. Terry peels off her latex gloves and stuffs them into the side pocket of her bag. She hooks her purse over her shoulder, grabs the Pop-Tart still warm from the toaster, and says from the door, “Thank you, Phyl. Don’t push yourself too hard today, okay?”

“Hey, look who’s talking.”


Terry’s second patient lives ten miles up the highway from Phyllis. His name is Earl, and he’s only seven years older than Terry but will probably be in the ground before Labor Day. While she nibbles on the cinnamon pastry, her car in cruise control so she can concentrate on her driving while eating, she looks out at all the healthy trees under the morning sun alongside the highway. There are tall pines and a few white birches, but what she’s staring out at are all the deciduous trees whose branches are hidden by their own green lushness, not a gypsy moth in sight. That they seem to be in only her neighborhood makes her feel unlucky, or slightly wronged, or wrongly accused or, no, maybe rightly accused. Like this legion of predatory caterpillars is some Old Testament punishment for her sins.

This is not a way she usually sees the world. She does not think in terms of sins or punishment for them by some god she does not believe in. But there’s something about the caterpillars attacking her trees that feels personal. Like they’re trying to prove some kind of cosmic point about her lack of care. About something.

A state police cruiser passes her fast on the left. She waits for it to get far ahead of her, then cracks the window and tosses out the rest of the Pop-Tart so she won’t finish it. At sixty she prides herself on having gained only a few pounds since college so long ago. It was four years when she did not see or think much at all about strange and beautiful Kai Spero, but the summer after her commencement there he was, shirtless under the sun in Boston Common, riding a unicycle through a flock of pigeons scattering away from the sidewalk as he pedaled through them. His curly hair seemed thicker and he wore round blue sunglasses and held a paperback in one hand, his left arm held out lazily for balance as he read.

Terry was with her boyfriend that afternoon, a kind boy named Gene whom she’d met in a geography class two semesters earlier, got drunk with at a house party just before Halloween, slept with two nights later, and then became his girlfriend because why not? It was like trying on a denim jacket at a used clothing store, the shoulders fitting perfectly, the sleeves a bit short but the price next to nothing.

But seeing Kai pedal by on his unicycle that June, something happened: he was a young man now, and with Gene’s big hand around hers, her nursing degree framed on the bedroom wall of her childhood home thirty miles north, what she saw in Kai was an unapologetic freedom, and it made her feel bland. Watching him then, she began to sense that perhaps she had always been too in need of security and fitting in, and that maybe she did not truly value herself and all she could really be, and that while yes, Gene and his broad shoulders and sweet manners and bright business mind were lovely, walking with him that afternoon felt as if she were being led down a wide paved road while on either side of it was a grand circus forever playing, men and women being called to do dangerous things that made them more alive than they would ever be otherwise.

Oh, but Kai only lived dangerously, didn’t he? And as Terry slows for the exit to Amesbury, a sedan in front of her with a bumper sticker that says Decency: It’s the New Thing, she wishes she had the time this morning to drink that coffee with Phyllis and tell her more about her husband. Yes, he probably did still want her, but he wanted others too; married women and men in the same room and at the same time with Terry. She truly wanted Phyllis’s thoughts about that. And she had no illusions about Phyllis’s ability to take it all in either, for Terry had worked long enough with old people not to infantilize them.

One patient of hers, dead now for years, had been a showgirl and a sex worker overseas during the war. One afternoon after Terry had irrigated her Foley catheter, the old woman said, “My husband never knew. He thought I’d been a virgin. And to think that I’d gone to bed with over one hundred men.” She said this in an almost wistful tone, as if she were recalling an old story from someone else’s life, and while she said this she looked like what she’d become, a grandmother and a great-grandmother, a small round woman with a skein of blue hair who embroidered images of teacups and kittens and birthday balloons.


Earl’s daughter Loryn answers the door. Her phone is pressed to her ear and she’s probably Leah’s age exactly but looks ten years older. Her hair is cut short and dyed a shade of black that makes Terry think of cheap Halloween witch capes. She’s in a black T-shirt too, the front a bearded sorcerer and a mountaintop and a fire-breathing dragon flying over its peak. She lowers her phone and presses it to her chest. “He’s having a good day. I’ll be right up.”

Terry smiles behind her mask and climbs the narrow stairwell, its wooden treads worn in the middle. Their creaking is loud and joins in with Loryn’s voice, “Yeah, right? And I fucking told her that too.”

The apartment is small and smells like cat litter and scorched coffee. From the living room come TV voices, clearly a sitcom with its canned laughter timed to go off every fifteen seconds. Earl is fully reclined in his La-Z-Boy, a bundle of bones in a flannel shirt and pajama bottoms, worn pleather slippers on his raised feet. He too should have a mask on but does not. Why bother, at this point, he would say. The window curtains are parted, and in the midmorning light his face is the color of translucent veins. When he sees her he mutes the TV and smiles widely, his jawbone and orbitals calling too much attention to themselves. “There she is. There’s my buddy.”

“You don’t have to turn that down, Earl.”

“Hey, I’m just killing time, you know that.” He’s still smiling up at her. For his entire work life he painted houses, and now his hands on his lap are curled as if they’re still holding a brush and a roller, his knuckles protruding like skinned walnuts.

“Your daughter says you’re having a good day.”

“Did she?”

“She did.” Terry pulls out her blood pressure cuff and stethoscope. “What’s your number this morning?”

“About an eight.”

“That high?”

“Yeah. So’s my daughter, if you didn’t notice.”

“Are you sure?”

“That girl’s been lovey-dovey all morning. What else could it be?”

Terry wants to say more, but she has work to do and puts on her stethoscope, leans close to Earl, and listens to his heartbeat. It’s slow but steady and as she glances at her watch and counts each one, she feels a familiar professional sadness open up in her; Earl’s heart still sounds like it could go on for years, but it’s no match for the ravenous cells multiplying and dividing in every organ of Earl’s body, starting in his bones, which is what’s giving him such pain.

Earl’s saying something, but she can’t hear him. She holds up one finger that she’ll be right with him, then watches the rising and falling of his chest, counting his respirations too. She puts away her stethoscope and writes these numbers down in her notebook, then takes his temperature, and here come the creaking of the stairs and his daughter’s footsteps. On the rug behind Earl’s La-Z-Boy their cat sleeps on its side beside the plastic toys of Earl’s five-year-old grandson. Terry has seen him only once when he was home from school with the flu. “Doesn’t he look good today, Terry? I think he’s gained some weight.”

“Like hell I have. What’re you on, anyways?”

“Nope, we’re not doing this today, Dad. I’m clean and you fucking know it.”

“Do I?”

“Jesus, I’m going to work. Ma’s comin’ at two.” Earl’s daughter sticks an unlit cigarette between her lips. She grabs her phone and keys and pocketbook and pauses in the doorway. “And by the way, you friggin’ people can trust me to give him his meds, you know.” She’s looking at Terry as she says this. She’s just finished taking Earl’s blood pressure, which is quite high, and now she reaches for her notebook and pen.

“Be nice. This woman’s here to help me.”

“And what, I’m not?”

Terry pulls from her bag the morphine cartridge. Because Earl said his pain level is at an 8, she’s going to give him half a cc instead of the quarter she was planning. “It’s not up to me, Loryn. But I’ll tell you what, I think you’re doing a wonderful job taking care of your father.”

“Now why can’t you ever say that?” Her eyes seem to darken and she stares at Earl in his chair, this sixty-seven-year-old man who looks ninety. Then she clomps quickly down the stairwell, but at the landing she stops and for a moment there’s quiet, like she already regrets what she just said, the exterior door opening then closing softly.

Earl’s forearm is loose skin over bones, but even after all the chemo and radiation his veins are easy to find. He’s talking now about his ex-wife, how for years she hated him.

“But now that I’m on my way out, she’s being nice.”

“She in your will?” Terry’s smiling behind her mask, and she hopes he can hear the tone of the dark joke she was trying to make. Earl jokes about his fast-approaching death all the time, and so she’s learned to do that too. You have to meet patients where they are.

“Maybe I’m wrong, I don’t know.”

“About what, hon?”

“My kid being high. Maybe she’s just having a good day.”

“Her pupils do look normal to me, Earl. You might want to give her the benefit of the doubt.” She finishes the injection and applies an adhesive bandage to Earl’s arm and puts everything away. Earl’s looking up at her.

“I blame myself for her problem.”

“The addiction?”

“You bet, I passed it down to her. The way my old man passed his down to me. And my mother too. Can’t forget her. Christ, they were both a pair a drunks.” His Scotch Irish features are fading details on a small skull, and standing there beside his La-Z-Boy, it’s clear to Terry that he knows it will be empty soon enough and he seems to have made peace with that.

She glances at her watch. Her next patient isn’t for another hour, and the drive is only thirty minutes. Up against the window is a half table, its scratched leaf folded down. She pulls out a chair and sits. On the table is a newspaper crossword puzzle, but no one has played it, and she says, “My ex was a drinker.”

“You tell me that before?”

“I don’t think so. He quit, though. Like you.”

Earl lays his forearms on the La-Z-Boy’s armrests. He leans his head back and closes his eyes. He winces once, but his breathing is steady and even and he opens one eye and glances over at her, then closes it again. “I haven’t had a drink in seventeen years, but if I didn’t have what you just gave me, I’d be drinking again, believe me.”

“I can understand that.”

Earl’s quiet a moment. On the TV is a commercial on the newest cell phones, a young couple looking so happy as they stare at their screens sitting side by side on a sofa.

“Was he a mean drunk?”

“No, he just acted stupid.” She sees Kai as she says this, all that constantly blazing curiosity about life gone from his eyes, only to be replaced by a moist-eyed, heavy-lidded cynicism bordering on self-pity, Brubeck playing behind him because her husband loved to drink his bourbon to Brubeck.

“I was.” Earl’s eyes are still closed. “I was a mean son of a bitch. That’s why my wife hated me.”

Terry wants to ask if he ever hit her, but she stays quiet. She likes Earl, and it would be hard to keep liking him if he said yes.

“Don’t be surprised if she gives me an overdose.” Earl’s smiling again, then he stops smiling. “Can you bring me the phone please, hon?” His voice sounds thick and weaker than a moment ago, and she lifts his phone from its cradle beside the TV and hands it to him.

“Can you dial it for me?”

“Sure.”

Earl recites some numbers to her and Terry taps them in, his eyes closed again as she hands him the phone and grabs her bag and hooks her purse strap over her shoulder.

“Loryn? Sweetie.” He’s slurring his words just a bit, and as Terry stands in the doorway, she knows he’ll be asleep soon.

“Your daddy loves you, ’kay? Don’t you ever forget that. Please, I—” He stops, and Terry can hear his daughter’s voice on the other end though not her tone. Earl opens his eyes as if to better concentrate on what he’s hearing, and Terry waves goodbye and he lifts his hand and then she’s moving down the narrow stairwell, the steps creaking so loudly it’s hard to believe they’ll hold up much longer.


On her drive to Seabrook, Michael calls. For a half breath she almost doesn’t answer it. She likes her solitude, especially when driving through these salt marshes under the sun. This time of year, the tall grass is a pale-green and every few hundred feet they part for narrow rivers of saltwater that cut through them for the ocean when the tide’s going out, as it must be now. Her windows are halfway down and even though this seaside air is a bit too cool, there are the smells of the sea and the mudflats and that thick cordgrass, a word Kai taught her years ago, Kai, who needed to know the names of everything.

She presses the answer button on the screen of her console. “Hey, you.”

“Hey, yourself.” Michael’s voice sounds a bit tinny, like he’s in his own car driving somewhere too. “How’s my miracle worker?”

“No miracles here. Just me.” It’s how he talks to her, like everything she does is somehow better than what others do. It often irks her, but she has yet to complain about it.

“My deposition got out early. Wanna grab some lunch?”

“I can’t, Mike. It’s Tuesday, remember?”

He’s quiet a moment. Up ahead is the short bridge over more water, and on the other side are seafood restaurants along the road that are not yet open for the summer. Terry’s hungry and wishes she hadn’t thrown out the rest of Phyllis’s Pop-Tart. Normally she’d pack herself half a sandwich and an apple, but the gypsy moths last night gave her a late start this morning and so she did not. “You there?”

“Sorry, lost you for a bit. How about dinner tonight? My treat.”

It’s never not his treat, this man who, like Kai, has always had a gift for making money, even before Michael became a trial lawyer at age fifty twelve years ago. She imagines them eating at a candlelit table at one of the nicer restaurants on the river, Michael sipping his vodka martini, Terry nursing her white wine while big, ruddy-faced Michael Ford holds forth on his day but not for long because he’s not an asshole and he’ll soon swing the conversation back to her, though she often does not feel like talking about her day. Especially lately when she’s been feeling so—so what?

Stranded.

“Not tonight, Michael. I’ll be too tired to be any fun.”

He says he understands and his tone stays upbeat, but she knows he’s disappointed. Michael loves to be out and about while she never has, and now he’s talking about his oldest son’s promotion at some finance firm on Wall Street. He needs to “sign off ” and give him a call.

“Mike?”

“Yeah, sweetie?”

“I think I need tonight to myself, if that’s okay.”

“Of course, that’s our deal, right? No problemo. I’ll call you tomorrow.”

She thanks him and tells him to say hi to his son, and then she’s driving over the bridge thinking about the word stranded. Is that what she feels? For despite her large shingled house being empty of her husband and children, doesn’t she, for the most part, still love living in it on her five acres of woods? Doesn’t she love her back deck that looks out over a break in the pines to the floodplain filled with its own cordgrass, hawks soaring about and an occasional white egret perched on a fallen tree trunk? Doesn’t she love how the kitchen sink looks out over all this, the framed childhood art of her son and daughter hanging on either side from the countertop to the ceiling? Doesn’t she love her wide-plank floors and the living room whose walls are covered with abstract paintings, the bookshelves filled with hardcover novels, nearly every one of which she’s read? Doesn’t she love her dining room and the long table where she and Kai, where Nicholas and Leah, where her mother and father before they passed, where Kai’s mother before she passed, where good friends like Michael and Sandy Ford would gather for weekend dinners Kai cooked—pork roast with fennel and garlic, Cornish hens in a cabernet sauce, homemade pot de crème—and there’d be classical or jazz on the stereo, half-empty wineglasses catching the light of the chandelier that Kai made out of driftwood? Doesn’t she love her children’s bedrooms upstairs, which have changed as they’ve changed: Leah’s is now spare and serious, books on economics and climate change on shelves that used to hold trophies for field hockey and dance competitions, Nicholas’s now a dusty den of guitars and guitar stands, an old record player under the window stacked on an even older one, a bass guitar in the corner with its neck broken because Nicholas could sometimes have a temper. When her son was eleven or twelve, he stopped going to soccer practice to take guitar lessons instead, and on his desk is his collection of Star Wars figures beside a half-deflated soccer ball next to two guitar picks, evidence of his molting from one skin to a newer one to yet another.

And maybe that’s what she feels, not stranded, but suspended—not in this place—but in time. For so much of her adult life she has been a wife and a mother, and for over twenty years she was a geriatric nurse, but now she’s, what? The no-longer-needed mother of her two grown children? Her old friend Michael-the-widower’s girlfriend? Neighbor to her estranged husband living across the street? An estranged husband who, by the way, she’s been thinking about more frequently than she would like? And for two years now she’s been a part-time visiting nurse because she cannot bear the thought of retiring. Because what would she do? Who would she be?


Frances Daly’s driveway is narrow and covered with white seashells that look like they belong in Florida. Her personal care aide’s Corolla is nowhere to be seen, nor is her nephew’s car, which means Frances has either gone with one of them or been left alone again when she should not be. In fact, at this stage of her dementia she should be in the memory unit of Terry’s former employer, though in many ways that was a horrible place to leave this earth, what with the unit’s bright fluorescent lights that never turned off, its concrete floors covered in shining linoleum, its Muzak and plastic flowers and parked wheelchairs of mumbling or quietly stoic men and women who would sometimes remember who they were, their lives flickering back at them like the sweep of a flashlight in the night woods they were forever lost in.

Frances’s house used to be a mobile home and now has outer walls around it and a roof built over it. At the end of the driveway is her propane tank on a bed of crushed stone, and beyond it the salt marshes stretching west all the way to the massive concrete dome of the nuclear power plant. Under the late-morning sun it’s the color of charcoal, and Terry knocks on Frances’s door and thinks of how when Kai was in college he held a hunger strike in front of the plant for seventeen days, though now he fully supports what he used to despise, this man who, when they were young, held her to him and told her he would never need anyone but her, only her, “eternally.”

Terry turns Frances’s doorknob and lets herself in. When she first started treating this woman it was for an infected bedsore on her coccyx, the small house smelling like a dead dog. Frances’s nephew should have called 911, but he’s a gamer who plays medieval games on his computer day and night with other gamers around the world, and all he did was light some incense. Terry had called social services at the time, and Frances’s nephew got a warning from the state.

Now, in the dim light of the narrow living room, Frances is stretched out on the sofa in a wool sweater and white knee socks, her shoes tied but her legs bare, and as Terry gets closer she can see that the old woman is wearing what look like boxer shorts. Her eyes are open and her arms rest on either side of her, one hand clenched in a fist, the other loose and relaxed.

“Frances, honey, it’s me. It’s your nurse, Terry.”

Frances turns her head toward her. “Did you find it?”

“Find what, hon?”

“Your wallet. Your wallet and all that money.”

“Oh, I sure did. Thank you for asking.”

“I knew he didn’t steal it. My father would never steal from anyone. Why are you wearing that mask?”

The old woman’s legs are covered in goose bumps, and now both her hands are clenched and she rests them on her hip bones.

“Did you dress yourself today, Frances? Where’s your PCA?” Terry would prefer to give Frances a name, but there have been so many comings and goings she doesn’t want to confuse her further.

“She went out for clams.”

“Your PCA?”

“No, Dolly. But she’s been gone for—” Frances’s eyes fill and she presses her fists to her mouth and then she begins to moan, and Terry sets down her bag and hurries through the kitchen to the back bedrooms.

The hallway smells like pot, and the nephew’s door is covered with a poster of a winged creature stabbing some beast with a sword, the letters Elden Ring in dripping gold above. Notched neatly into the edge of the poster is a hasp and padlock, which is clearly secured, like what he has in there is Top Secret.

Frances’s room is barely large enough to hold her unmade bed, which the PCA should have taken care of by now. On the dusty bureau is a white porcelain figurine of a horse pulling a plow, a little man behind it in what looks like a straw hat. Behind this is a pewter framed photo of Frances and Dolly. They were lovers for over forty years, and they’re both smiling in the sunshine and snuggled close together in thick parkas. Rising behind them like some all-accepting god is one of the snow-covered Alps.

When Frances showed Terry this, she was in one of her more lucid moments. “We were so happy those days. Just so damn happy.”

Terry had just irrigated Frances’s bedsore and packed it with Santyl to eat the dead flesh, and even though she was in quite a bit of pain that day, Frances insisted on doing laps up and down the hallway, gripping the rolling antibiotic IV stand at her side. Now she’s crying softly out in the living room, and Terry opens her middle drawer and finds a pair of jeans and carries them back to her.

“Sweetie, let’s get you dressed.”

Frances is looking up at the ceiling, both hands still clenched in fists. She’s stopped crying, but her temples are damp, and Terry unties Frances’s shoes and pulls them off and sets them on the floor. She feeds the left jean leg over Frances’s left foot then the right, pulling the jeans as far up as her knees. “Let’s sit up, Frances. Let’s get these on you.”

“Terry?”

“Yep, it’s me. Here, let’s sit up.” Terry lifts Frances’s lower legs and gently swings them toward the edge of the sofa.

“I had a terrible dream.”

“You did?”

“Yes, I did.”

Terry gets her hands under Frances’s arms and helps her stand. She pulls the jeans up her legs, the smell of dried urine in her face as she leans close and zips and snaps the pants, which are loose around Frances’s waist.

“God, it was terrible.”

“Can we get this sweater off so I can take your blood pressure, hon?”

Terry lifts the sweater up and Frances raises her arms over her head, nothing on underneath but a loose T-shirt, the logo of Babson’s swim team over the left breast pocket. When she was younger that’s what Frances was, a competitive swimmer who once almost made the Olympic team and for years coached women’s swimming at Babson.

“You were being so mean to me, Dolly. Why?”

“It was just a dream, sweetie.” Terry has her sit and as she goes about taking her vitals, Frances talks all the way through it. When Terry takes her blood pressure Frances seems to think Terry’s her nephew, and when Terry checks her heart and respirations Frances is talking to Dolly again, but like she’s in the room somewhere behind Terry, and when she takes the old woman’s temperature Frances looks directly at the thermometer and says, “I should’ve killed him. I wished I’d killed him.”

“Who, Frances?”

“Oh, you know who. Don’t tell me you don’t know who.”

“Frances, did you take your meds this morning?”

In the shadowed light of the narrow house, Frances’s lined face looks both older than her seventy-nine years and younger, her short white hair sticking up in the back and looking in need of a wash. Terry records her vitals in her notebook and Frances says, “This won’t end well. I think you know that.”

“Did you take your Lexapro this morning, hon?”

“You think I don’t know it’s you behind that mask, but I do.” Frances clenches her fists again and starts to shake her head back and forth. Now she has goose bumps on her arms, and Terry tries to lift Frances’s arms to pull the sweater back down over her, but she twists away. “Don’t do that. Do you do that.”

“Okay, all right, I won’t.”

Frances’s chin quivers and her foggy blue eyes fill. On the back of the sofa is a light blanket, and Terry takes it and drapes it over her shoulders, but her sweater is still bunched up around her neck and the blanket slides right off.

“Lie down, hon. You should rest.”

Frances is quiet now. She’s shaking her head slowly back and forth. In the kitchen Terry finds her Lexapro inside Frances’s daily medication box next to an open toaster oven, the back of its front lid littered with what look like crumbs from a pizza crust. She pulls from the dishwasher a clean glass, and as she’s filling it with water at the sink she sees out the small curtained window the nephew’s Volkswagen approaching. There’s the crunch of the seashells under his tires, the engine shutting off, and his heavy footfalls up the steps.

He blusters in quickly and closes the door behind him too loudly. The nephew is an obese man in his forties with a bushy beard and long ponytail, and he’s clutching a white bag to his chest from a year-round sub shop down on the beach. “Hi. How’s she look today?”

“Not too good. What’re you doing leaving her alone like this? She should never be by herself. We’ve talked about this before.” Terry moves past him with Frances’s pill and the glass of water, the wonderful smell of what has to be a warm meatball sub coming from that bag. But the nephew just shrugs and sweeps his long hair away from his face. “So sue me, that girl didn’t show today, and Auntie and I needed lunch.”

Terry ignores him and holds the pill out to Frances, who’s still shaking her head back and forth, her eyes on the recliner in front of the dark TV like there’s someone bad sitting there. “Here you go, Frances. That’s it.”

From the kitchen comes the clattering of plates, the jangle of the silverware drawer being opened. Frances takes the pill and drinks from her water glass, and as Terry gathers up her things, she vows to get this woman somewhere better before the end of the week.


At the Starbucks in downtown Newburyport, Terry sits at the small window table eating her lunch and feeling guilty. She could probably have squeezed this in with Michael after all, though as she takes a bite of her hard-boiled egg, she’s glad to be alone. Her old life has fallen away and left her somewhat lost, but she also likes being largely by herself.

The first time she and Michael made love it felt wrong in one way and so completely right in another. This was her best friend Sandy’s husband, after all. This was Terry’s husband’s friend, Michael. Except no, Sandy had been dead for over a year and Kai had been gone for longer, and Michael, with his big soft body that was at first hard to get used to, was so attentive and generous that she would lie beside him afterward feeling deeply satisfied. Except lately she’s beginning to feel that she’s using Michael, that she’s taking more from him than she’s giving back. And there’s another feeling too, that she needs this to happen—or something like this—if she’s ever going to move into the next version of herself, into the next Terry Sullivan Spero.

For months after Kai left, Terry sat in that big empty house feeling sealed in wax. She still went to work every day and then she came home and changed and took her three-mile walk through the woods, often listening to crime podcasts, the stories mainly about girls and women being murdered by men; she cooked herself dinner, usually just a can of soup she heated on the stove, and she’d eat it in front of the TV news, though whatever was happening in the country or the world was like static on a radio she had long stopped listening to; she might watch a movie but not pay much attention to it, or she’d go to bed with a novel and read it in the light of her bedside lamp, but no matter how beautifully written one or the other might be, nothing seemed to move her in any way whatsoever.

Often she did not sleep through the night and would lie there in the dark staring up into a greater darkness, and if she began to cry she would tell herself to stop feeling sorry for herself; her children were grown and healthy; she had her own good health and lived in a house that had been fully paid for for years; she had work she loved; and she had friends there, though the truth is that most of her oldest friends had been friends to her and Kai, and now that they were no longer a couple these friends seemed to have vanished, even when they had not. It was she who had vanished.

For the most part, she was still invited to various dinners—Jan and Ian Williams in the summer, Bill and Toni Davies in the fall, Michael and Sandy Fords just before Sandy was diagnosed—and while everyone treated Terry as lovingly as they always had, it felt as if she had died and they were all being warm to a ghost.

Then Sandy got really sick, and her friends did what people do in the face of dying; a few became heroically involved while the others could not get away fast enough.

Michael believed Terry had been a “true hero” to his wife, but she didn’t think so. She went to see Sandy nearly every day, especially toward the end, because she loved the woman. She loved her kind eyes and long graying hair that she refused to color; she loved that unlike most of their friends, Sandy grew up with little, her father a school janitor, her mother having never gone past the eighth grade, yet here Sandy was a psychology professor at a community college; Terry loved that Sandy was a terrible cook, always bringing the same dry lasagna to every pot luck; she loved that of all her women friends, Sandy seemed to be the only one who didn’t get all doughy around dark and passionate Kai, and in fact, treated him like a mildly tedious little brother; and Terry loved Sandy’s irreverent humor. Once, when she was half-drunk at a dinner, religion came up and Sandy lifted her wineglass and said, “I bet Jesus would’ve been hot in the cot, don’t you?” Then she laughed hard at her own question, and no one laughed harder than her big husband, Michael, who clearly adored her in even more ways than Terry did.

The night Michael showed up, it was Labor Day weekend and Sandy had been in the ground since two summers before, a truly horrible July day because it could not have been more beautiful, every flower, tree, and lawn in full bloom under a blue, blue sky.

In the time since, Michael had lost himself in his work and he had lost weight. Terry would not call him a handsome man, but what made him attractive—other than his quick mind and general good cheer—was his size, which included his big head and wide, warm face, which now seemed to sag at his cheeks and chin, making him look like what he told her he felt, “Like half of me died too.”

They sat just a few feet from each other on Terry’s living room couch. Since her dinner, a half-eaten salad that was still on the coffee table in front of them, she’d been curled up on that couch under a blanket reading a novel everyone seemed to think was great while she did not. She could feel the author showing off quite a bit, wanting the reader to know just how well-traveled he was and world-weary yet hip and sensitive too. She was about to put it down and go to bed with one of her crime podcasts, but then came the knock, just one, as if whoever was at her doorstep did not really want to be standing there, and then came two more, and as she pulled off the blanket and stood she hated that she hoped it might be Kai.

Sitting beside her on the couch, Michael was still in his overcoat. His tie was loosened away from his shirt collar, and it was clear that he’d been drinking, though he was not drunk, just softened by whatever he’d been drinking. He thanked her for her phone calls those past few months, calls that didn’t last long because he clearly did not want to talk. He thanked her again for “heroically” tending to his wife in her last days.

“Oh, stop it, Mike. I loved her. We all did.”

“I know. I know you did.”

On her couch, she took his hand and held it. He’d brought a bottle of red wine with him, but it stood unopened on the coffee table and she did not offer to open it. Kai had been sober for years, but the time before he stopped drinking had been bad, and even though grieving, half-drunk Michael Ford was not Kai, she did not want to be around a man who did not have full control of himself. Though holding Michael’s hand it was clear that she was the one in control, she whose own loss seemed slight compared to this formerly big man’s beside her.

She asked about his kids, his son and two daughters, and for a while that seemed to restore him, for the oldest two, despite everything, seemed to be doing well. But then he began to talk about his youngest, Alli, who was not doing well, who had in fact dropped out of college and for months slept in her mother’s sewing room. It was another thing Terry had loved about Sandy, that she liked to sew her own clothes and some of the clothes for her kids when they were little. When Terry told her that that’s the first thing that drew her to Kai, that he’d made his own shirt in high school, Sandy had laughed and said, “Oh he’s so full of shit, honey. Everything that man does is just to be fucking different.”

Then, on the couch beside her, Michael’s eyes began to fill because Alli had just moved out, though she refused to go back to school and was living with some boy over a bar in Salem, where they both worked for tips.

“And of the three of them, she’s the most like her mother.”

That’s the word that seemed to be a kick into his sagging, no longer ruddy face. He began to cry, and Terry moved closer and held him and he laid his head against her shoulder and intertwined his fingers between hers and then he pulled her hand to his chest. She kept stroking the side of his damp face, and after a while he stopped crying and kissed her cheek and jawbone and then her neck. Those kisses felt good against her skin, and she was about to turn her face toward his, but he pulled away and wiped his eyes on the sleeve of his overcoat. “I’m sorry.”

“Don’t be. We’re both lonely, Mike, that’s all.”

He looked over at her as if she’d just said something that hadn’t occurred to him, and Terry sat there feeling as if his grief and hers were two empty rooms in a large house that neither of them had ever wanted to step into in the first place.

Michael stood and thanked her for listening. Then he apologized again and was gone.

Two nights later he called and asked her to dinner. “You know, to give each other a little company,” and after dinner he drove her home. Sitting in the passenger’s seat, the engine still running, she asked him to turn it off and come inside, and neither of them said anything as she took his hand and led him up the stairs to the bedroom that since the house was built had only been hers and Kai’s, even in that dark time when he wanted to fill it with two or three other couples, as if lovemaking was some kind of team sport, and why was she so “repressed and uptight”?

Lying together naked under the covers in the dark, she and Michael held each other for a long while. They began to kiss, but it was like holding a pot of cold water over a candle flame and trying to bring the water to a boil. They stopped trying and lay side by side, and they told each other mostly funny stories about Sandy. Then they slept, and when Terry woke, Michael was touching her with his fingers, and then she was opening her legs to him, and it was surprisingly lovely and like every new thing you never wanted until it showed you that you’d been wrong.


In Lowell Terry drives past one long mill building after another, then turns south onto a narrow two-lane street. There are cars parked on both sides, some of them rusted out with half their wheels up on the curb, and she passes the Orthodox church, its golden dome flashing under the sun. Across the street is a Cambodian grocery store, and at the corner of the first intersection there’s a gas station and mechanics shop, a man standing in the sunshine near the entrance to the open bay. He has a shaved head and is scrolling through his phone and smoking a cigarette, and there’s the loud echoing pneumatics of another man working inside, and now she’s driving by the high school.

It’s a modern building with concrete columns at its front glass doors. Two teenage boys in hoodies stand there talking to a black man in a security guard’s uniform, though he’s smiling at them both like he’s just told the boys a joke and is waiting for them to laugh.

She passes a barbershop, its sign in Spanish, and then block after block of two-decker apartment buildings. They’re covered in loose vinyl siding and their porches are sagging, and there’s an open grill on one, the fading flag of the Dominican Republic hanging over the railing of another. On her left is a liquor store advertising Keno and the Lottery and then comes the Salvation Army building. Beneath the first-floor windows are spray-painted fluorescent tags that look to her like some secret language from another planet, the young person who did them as alien to her as her daughter’s partner, Ted.

At the entrance to the parking lot of the Market Basket, a black woman in a headscarf pushes a fully loaded shopping cart down the sidewalk, its small wheels rattling over the uneven concrete. There’s a sheen of sweat glistening on the woman’s cheeks, and as Terry drives past her, she assumes that the woman’s Ethiopian or Somali, though that headscarf means she’s a Muslim. But aren’t Somalis the Muslim ones? Or is that Uganda? Once again Terry finds her nose pressed to the wall of her own ignorance about so many things.

But it’s a wall she has simply accepted as part of life. People are busy surviving, after all, and who, besides her leisurely ex-husband, has the time to constantly investigate and explore each and every little thing that comes up? Like fucking gypsy moths.

At the next intersection, she turns left and drives past the Irish pub. In its front window is a neon Guinness sign, and stuck to its closed front door is a Patriots bumper sticker and one for the Celtics and under that a faded happy face with a bullet hole in its forehead.

She thinks of her four o’clock, Brendan, and how the bullet he shot into his chest passed through part of his airway and esophagus, just missing his spine before exiting through his scapula. The damage to his esophagus and airway was minimal, but it’s his shattered scapula that’s giving him such pain, and as Terry pulls into the lot of Pho My Restaurant and the apartment buildings beyond it, she sees Brendan’s deep-brown eyes and high cheekbones, the blue-green glow of his large fish tank across his young face. In that light, his chin low as he looks up at her, he often looks wise yet bewildered. Kai’s face when he was a boy, her ex-husband who once, in the depths of his drinking, slurred that they should both kill themselves. You and me, eternally, Teresa.


Her patient Amanda goes by Mandi, and there’s a sticky note on her apartment door telling Terry to come right in. The note was written and signed by Mandi’s boyfriend Bing, a tall, muscular Cambodian who Mandi told Terry is with her just for her disability checks.

Mandi’s apartment always smells like cigarette smoke and is as dark as a cave, all her shades down. On the wall above a shelf of video game equipment is the largest widescreen TV Terry has ever seen. It covers nearly the entire wall, and Mandi is sitting in front of it in her wheelchair, watching one of those reality housewife shows. Most of the women are middle-aged and have dyed blonde hair and artificial breasts and the too-smooth faces of mannequins and they wear a lot of gold and diamonds and drink and argue. Mandi’s TV volume is turned so loud now on one of those arguments—this one in a stretch limousine—that when Terry calls Mandi’s name, she doesn’t hear her.

Terry walks around the sofa and stands in front of Mandi and waves. At first Mandi doesn’t see her. She’s eating potato chips from a bag in her lap, and between the fingers of her other hand is a smoking cigarette, her cell phone and a liter of Diet Pepsi on the small table beside her wheelchair. Mandi weighs over two hundred and fifty pounds and is half Vietnamese, half French Canadian, her face beautiful though bloated from all the weight that has caused her diabetes and, just a few months ago, the amputation of both her lower legs.

One of the TV housewives is calling the other a lying bitch, and Mandi jerks her face in the direction of Terry waving at her, sticks her cigarette between her lips, reaches for the remote, and pauses her show.

“Fuck, Terry, you scared the shit outta me.”

“I’m sorry, hon. I called you, but you didn’t hear me.”

“Is Bing’s note on the door?”

“Yes, thank you.” Terry sets her bag down on the carpet. “How’re you feeling today?”

In the glow of the TV, Mandi looks like she wants to say something, but instead she takes a deep drag off her cigarette, blows out smoke, reaches into the bag of chips for another handful, then drops them back into the bag. She looks up at Terry then away. She starts to say something, but then shakes her head and starts to cry.

Terry touches her soft shoulder and gives it a squeeze. “That’s right, hon, let it out. That’s it.” On the TV screen, the heavily made-up woman who just called another a lying bitch is frozen, the words having just left her mouth, and Terry thinks how ugly anger looks on a human face.

“I’m a freak, Terry. I’m a fuckin’ freak.”

“No, honey.” Terry squats beside Mandi’s chair and rubs her bare arm. It’s cool and dry and holds layers and layers of flesh. “Don’t say that about yourself, Mandi. Don’t even think it. You’re beautiful. You’ll always be beautiful.”

“I mean to be so fucking big all my life and now—” She motions her cigarette hand in the direction of her knees, the stumps of her lower legs hanging above the floor. “I’m disgusting, and you know it.”

“No, I don’t know that, Mandi. I don’t know that at all.”

Mandi sniffles and shakes her head and stubs out her cigarette. “Fucking Bing calls me Butter Ball now. He says he can just roll me down the street.”

“That’s cruel, Mandi.”

In the TV light Terry reaches into her bag and pulls out her thermometer, blood pressure cuff, and stethoscope. “Have you thought of asking him to leave?”

Mandi’s scrolling fast through her phone, her eyeliner beginning to run, and Terry imagines her putting it on this morning in her wheelchair in front of a mirror for her boyfriend.

“He says it’s easier to fuck me now too.” Mandi puts down her phone and reaches for a tissue from a box of them beside her Diet Pepsi. She dabs at her eyes and blows her nose, and Terry tries to ignore the image of Mandi’s boyfriend spreading her now shortened legs.

“My sister tells me I’m stupid to stay with him, but what am I gonna do?”

“What do you mean, sweetie?”

Mandi’s wearing a short-sleeved blouse, her bare upper arm as large in circumference as one of Terry’s thighs. She wraps the cuff around it and starts compressing the bulb, her stethoscope on to check Mandi’s systolic pressure. Mandi’s sniffling, her eyes on the frozen image of the huge screen in front of her. “I always hated being by myself.”

“Are you still taking your Zestril every morning, hon?”

“And my fucking sister, she’s big too, but never like me.”

“Mandi, your blood pressure’s really high. Are you taking your meds?” Terry’s recording the numbers in her notebook, and she makes a note to email Mandi’s doctor.

“Of course I am. And my friggin’ insulin. All I do is give myself shots and sit in this fucking chair all day.” A jagged breath rises up from her chest and she shakes her head and then she’s crying again. “Bing’s fucking somebody else, I know he is.”

“How do you know that, hon?”

“Because I can smell her on him. Some other skank’s perfume. I can smell it.”

Kai. He’d been sober for months and now he needed a new kind of oblivion. He’d talked about it for years, the suffocating “lie” that was monogamy. “Nothing against you, Teresa. I just don’t believe that two human beings are supposed to mate for life. I’ve concluded that it’s unnatural.”

Concluded. It was how he talked. He would carry out his many investigations, and then he would come to conclusions.

Mandi’s scrolling through her phone again. She blows her nose then pulls another cigarette from its pack. Her cheeks glisten in the TV light, and as Terry releases the blood pressure cuff and drops it into her bag, she says, “Men can be real selfish pricks, Mandi.”

“My father wasn’t. He took care of us his whole life.” Mandi’s voice sounds stopped up. “All he did was work. My mother was the selfish one. That bitch was never satisfied with anything and she put him in the fucking ground.” Mandi places the cigarette between her lips and reaches for the lighter.

“Not till I’m done, okay? And you know how I feel about that habit.”

“Are you trippin’? You know how big I’d get if I quit? Please.”

But she waits for Terry to put her stethoscope’s earpieces back in and press the diaphragm into the deep softness of Mandi’s chest. It takes Terry a moment to find it, but when she does, Mandi’s heart sounds like a small animal fleeing something big and dangerous, and it seems miraculous to Terry that this erratic bit of muscle can power a body as large and listless as Mandi Pham’s.

Mandi lights up, and Terry knows not to say one thing. She’s seen it and seen it and seen it. People do what gives them pleasure until it does the opposite and then they’re forced to find a new way. After Mandi exhales smoke, Terry counts her respirations, which, like her heart are too many within such a short period of time.

“How are your phantom pains, Mandi? Still bothering you?”

But Mandi’s not listening. She’s shaking her head slowly and staring at the housewife’s frozen mouth. “I’ll kill her. I will. I can get a burner. It’s real easy to get one around here.”

“Just kick him out, Mandi.” Terry pulls out her phone and taps her way to make it a flashlight. She’s thinking how there’s no such thing as “the other woman” even when there is one, or several, as in Kai’s case; the problem is always with the one who strays and the one who’s left behind.

Left behind.

She squats on the floor in front of Mandi’s knees and stumps. Mandi’s sniffling. She takes a drag off her cigarette and stares at her phone again. She wears Celtics basketball shorts, even in the winter, the polyester hems ending at her bare knees. Terry shines her light on the left stump then the right. They look like the heads of cloth puppets with their mouths sewn shut, but their skin color looks good. Terry needs to touch them to feel for any heat, but not only did she not have time this morning to pack a lunch, she didn’t pack enough latex gloves either. She asks Mandi if she can wash her hands in the bathroom.

“Go ’head.” Mandi takes a long drink off her Diet Pepsi, puts the smoking cigarette between her lips, and grabs the TV’s remote. The sounds of screaming women fill the dark apartment, and in the bathroom Terry washes her hands with soap and hot water. The shower behind her is a roll-in with handicap bars in the walls and a reinforced bench for Mandi to sit on. Beside the toilet is another handicap bar screwed into the wall, and Terry thinks how difficult it must be for obese Mandi to transfer herself from her wheelchair to the toilet seat, even with the narrow plywood board she uses, which is leaning against the wall beside a wastebasket full of wadded tissues and an empty sixteen-ounce beer can.

Terry looks around, but there are no towels anywhere. On the shelf where she’s found one before is an ashtray filled with cigarette butts, their filters coated with lipstick. Beside that is a vape pen and a pack of rolling papers and a Sports Illustrated magazine with a half-naked young woman on the cover. Walking down the hallway and shaking the water from her hands, Terry thinks how cruel it is for Mandi’s boyfriend to even have that in the house, the model on the cover so very slender and with all four of her limbs.

Back in Mandi’s living room one housewife is crying and another is comforting her, though as she pats the other’s back she seems to do it carefully so as not to damage her nails. Mandi’s eating again from the bag of potato chips, and she turns the volume lower but it’s still too loud. Terry squats and points her phone at Mandi’s stumps. She touches them with two fingers, and they’re warm but not too warm. She looks up at Mandi smoking and eating and distracting herself with rich, unhappy women whose unhappiness has made them famous and even richer.

“Can you mute that, hon?”

Mandi does. She exhales smoke and stubs out her cigarette and reaches for her phone again. “You done yet?”

“How’s your insulin supply, Mandi?”

“It gets delivered. Every fucking thing gets delivered.”

“You must feel cooped up a lot of the time.”

“Bing’s gonna take me for a walk later.”

“That’s good.” Terry wants to say more but does not.

“Not many people can push me, you know. You tell me to kick him out, but he’s strong, Terry. He’s really fucking strong.”

“So are you, hon.” Terry stands, shuts off her phone light, and gathers her equipment into her bag. “Don’t forget that, Mandi. You’re strong too.” Terry wants to touch her shoulder, but Mandi flicks the TV back on and turns up the volume, and the last thing Terry hears before pulling the front door closed is, “Oh my God, you girls are my BFFs. You know that? You are my best damn friends in the whole wide world.”


On the drive north for her next patient, Terry calls her son. It’s just after eleven on the West Coast and she lets the phone ring four times before hanging up. She keeps forgetting Nicholas’s work hours. If he and his band aren’t performing late into the night, then they’re at their studio trying to make new music, which her son told her always goes better after midnight.

Nicholas lives with a roommate in an apartment not far from the beach in Santa Monica. The one time she visited him, Nicholas gave her his room and slept on the couch, though they could have shared his room in shifts because she was always just getting up as he was coming home, and the only time they really saw each other those three days was at restaurant dinners, which for her son were breakfasts.

During the day she went for walks along the beach or drove her rental car up the coast, marveling at the endless blue of the Pacific, which felt not only larger than the Atlantic but somehow more malicious too. It made her worry for Nicholas, which was silly because he was obviously happier than he’d ever been. But now she wishes she left him a message just to tell him that she misses him and she loves him and please call me when you can.

It’s morning in Costa Rica now too. She could call Leah. Except she’s working with Ted on some organic farm owned by one of Ted’s Norwegian friends. The last time Terry called her daughter there were the sounds of heavy machinery behind her, and Leah was a bit out of breath and said she’d call later, though she did not. Other times when Terry’s spoken to her, she can tell that Leah’s in the same room as Ted, her daughter’s tone cordial but distant, like she’s being monitored closely.

“Are you happy, honey? Are you glad you’re there?”

“We’re doing important work, Mom. Everything we do is one hundred percent sustainable.”

“But are you happy? Do you miss school?” Terry wanted to ask her if she missed home too, as in the United States, as in New England, as in the house she was raised in in the woods that are now being destroyed by a swarm of gypsy moths. But Ted’s voice was in the background, her—their—tone that of a foreman telling their crew that break was over, and Leah would say that she had to go, “Love you,” and hang up.

In Lawrence, driving over the Merrimack River, Terry glances out at the sun glinting off the windows of the brick mill buildings that line the water’s banks. For decades workers in those mills made textiles and wool, but now those buildings are filled with corporate offices and condos and a few upscale restaurants, and it’s hard for Terry to look out at all this and not think of the passage of time, how it can move faster than even the people inhabiting that time. One day you’re in it and the next you’re not. You seem to have stayed still when the world has kept moving.

She begins to feel like she might actually cry. She turns on the radio, but that’s a mistake because on the classical station, Yo Yo Ma is playing one of Bach’s suites on his miraculous cello. It was Kai who introduced her to Yo Yo Ma, and as she accelerates over the bridge and passes three or four cars in a row, she knows that part of her truly hates her husband. She hates what he did, yes, but more than that, she hates how over the years of their marriage he and his desire to know everything became her own private living university, whether she wanted to go back to school or not.

In their early years it was philosophy. Terry’s first nursing job was at Lawrence General, and she worked long shifts while Kai went to graduate school to study the Existentialists, whom he would read to her in the early mornings when she was about to leave for work and he’d been up all night studying and drinking black tea. He hadn’t yet discovered exercise and he stood there in the small kitchen of their apartment looking pale and too thin, his curly hair matted on one side because he would read for hours stretched out on the sofa. Terry can’t remember the names of those philosophers he loved so much, but most of them were French and one was a woman and what he loved so much about them was their argument for personal freedom and authenticity. “Not some bullshit life, Teresa, but a true life.”

Soon he had a master’s degree and got a job as an adjunct professor at two colleges down in Boston. One was a night class, and he’d come home about the same time she did because now she was working second shift and they’d both be tired. But he’d be more than tired; he’d be dejected. “I hate teaching, Teresa. I fucking hate it.”

When she asked him why, handing him a glass of wine then pouring one for herself, he would tell her that except for one or two of his students, none of them seemed passionate about anything. They were just taking his course because they had to, and he refused to try to make them care the way he did.

“But do you have to do that?”

“Yes, I think I do. But I refuse. I’m not going to hold their fucking hands. There are other things I want to do.”

“Like what?”

Like computers, it turned out. It was something he’d been drawn to ever since he met a computer scientist at the university coffee shop. He was a German man, and they talked for over an hour about that man’s work, and then Kai had quit his teaching jobs and was buying books on programming and coding, whatever that was. But within a year or two, Kai found a faster, more accurate way to “optimize data retrieval,” and he patented this new way and then sold it to a big advertising firm and now they had money. A lot of it.

Maybe that was the worst thing that had happened to them because now Kai was free, unlike other people who had to work all week, to do whatever he felt like doing, which was one thing after another: aerodynamics, which somehow led to designing and building skateboards, which led to Kai in his thirties becoming a competitive skateboarder, which led to his discovering mountain biking, which led to him designing better mountain bikes, though he lost money on that one, but he didn’t care because they still had plenty of it and now the kids were little and he’d drive them to school and pick them up and then he discovered carpentry and insisted on helping their builder frame their house on their five acres. They bought the seven acres of woods across the street too and lived in an Airstream he bought new, a big one with a master bedroom for Terry and Kai and a bedroom each for Nicholas and Leah, though their daughter was only three years old and would get scared alone in her room with all those dark trees outside, and she’d climb into bed with her brother or come to their room down the long paneled hallway.

Terry, of course, no longer needed to work, but she loved being a nurse. She found that she especially loved caring for older people, and after taking a few years off when the kids were very young, she went back to school to specialize in geriatric nursing and all the while, despite how Kai had never stopped moving, throwing himself into one discipline or trade after another, he was a good father.

For years Terry worked the second shift, and it was Kai who cooked and sat down with the kids for dinner. It was Kai who helped them afterward with their homework or played board games with them at their small kitchen table. (He was adamant about there being no TV or cell phones in their lives.) It was Kai who tucked them in and read them books until they were too sleepy to continue and he’d shut off the lamp, leaving their doors open to the hallway light. And it was Kai who washed the dishes and cleaned the kitchen, and when she would come home near midnight, he’d be in the kitchenette reading a book on neuroscience or architecture, and he would offer to heat up for her some of the supper they’d had hours earlier.

She was rarely hungry that late, though, and she’d pull off her shoes and pour herself a glass of wine. Then she’d tiptoe into her kids’ rooms. She just wanted to see their sleeping faces, and many nights, she’d feel like quitting her job. They didn’t need her paycheck, after all. But the thought of being home all day while the kids were at school and Kai went so passionately about his various projects made her feel lonely and useless, and besides, she was good at nursing, very good, and it wouldn’t be too long before she earned her spot on the 7–3 shift anyway, and then she’d be home at night and not miss a thing.

But isn’t it ironic, she thinks as she slows for the exit to Andover, that when she finally did get on first shift, Kai would have dinner with the family but then he’d be gone all night to the workshop he now leased at the industrial park a few miles away. He told her that he was working on this new project or that one. That’s what he told her, anyway. And how many nights did she fall asleep in their half-empty bed feeling like a single mother?

Like a widow?


Gerald Byrne is a retired judge and lives in a freshly painted bungalow across from the park. The deciduous trees lining its fields and bike path are thick with green leaves that filter the midafternoon sunlight, and seeing this, Terry feels as if she’s left the stove on back home, or the front door wide open, or the kitchen faucet running into a plugged sink. She could have asked Kai to wrap her own trees in burlap last fall, so why didn’t she?

She pulls her car in behind Gerald’s Prius, and there he is in his open garage, poking through a toolbox on a workbench. He waves and smiles and picks up what looks like a large pair of pliers, and then he walks out into the sun to greet her.

Gerald is seventy-one years old and does not look like a man who only last fall had a major heart attack, four stents shoved into his blocked arteries. His gray hair is still fairly thick and combed back from his lined and nearly handsome face, and he’s wearing a faded polo shirt, khakis, and loafers with green socks. He’s slim and walks as lightly on his feet as a dancer, though Terry happens to know that all he’s ever done physically is sail and golf and walk his dogs.

“How’s my nightingale today?”

“How are you is the question, Gerald.” Terry pulls on her mask and grabs her bag, hooking her purse strap over her shoulder. She needs to use the bathroom and should have gone when she was in Mandi’s back in Lowell.

“Never better, my dear. Never better.”

“Wonderful.” Though she can hear the nasal buildup in Gerald’s voice, and his color isn’t so good. As she follows him over the slate walkway to his front door, he’s telling her that he just has to finish doing one thing and then “I’m all yours.”

All yours.

“Do you mind if I use your bathroom, Gerald?”

“Please, you know where it is. I’ll be with you in two shakes.” Gerald moves quickly down the hall to the kitchen, his house smelling like furniture polish and freshly vacuumed carpets. “Does your cleaning lady wear her mask, Gerald?”

“You bet.”

The hallway’s floor is shiny oak, its walls covered with framed black-and-white photos of long sailboats. From here Terry can see into the kitchen, where Gerald is squatting with the pliers at his overturned table, its four legs sticking up into the air.

She rests her bag and purse on the floor then steps into the small bathroom under the stairs. As she relieves herself, she takes in the marble tiles and the ivory pedestal sink. She looks at the polished walnut wainscoting and the light lemon of the walls above it, the wide gilt frame of the antique mirror hanging over the sink with its tasteful porcelain knobs and brushed-nickel faucet. And it’s hard not to think of the neighborhood she was just in. It’s hard not to think of Mandi Pham and the dark, tasteless apartment she may never leave.

Gerald is still in the kitchen when Terry comes out. He’s just finished tightening the nut securing one of the table legs, and he sets the pliers down on the floor and wedges his fingers under the tabletop to lift it back into place.

“Whoa, whoa, whoa. Let me help you with that. You shouldn’t even be doing this, mister.”

“I thought you said I had to stay active.”

“To a point.” She squats beside him and gets her fingers under the wood and together they lift and turn the table back onto its four legs.

“There,” she says. “Now no more funny business, all right?”

Gerald looks like he’s about to say something but then sneezes into the crook of his elbow. He pulls a handkerchief from the back pocket of his khakis and blows his nose. A man carrying a handkerchief seems like the vestige of a time gone by, and Terry feels a sadness open up in her about it, though she does not know why and shrugs it off immediately. “You have a cold?”

“It’s nothing. Would you like some coffee?”

She would, but she says no thank you and follows him into his living room. “You haven’t been taking any over-the-counter stuff for your cold, have you? They can go against your heart meds.”

“Nothing but what I’ve been prescribed, my dear, which is more than I’ve ever had to take before, I might add.”

As Terry pulls out her stethoscope and blood pressure cuff, Gerald sits in one of two wingback chairs facing a gas fireplace. On the mantel are various citations and awards for his “service to the legal community.” Some are brass plaques, others are freestanding prizes of clear glass, and his name is engraved into all of them: The Honorable Gerald M. Byrne.

Above these is a large oil painting of a lighthouse on a spit of rock in the midst of a stormy sea, the white foam of its cresting waves being ripped away by the wind. She once asked him what he liked about that painting, which always left her feeling a bit unsettled, and he said, “Because I’m the lighthouse. Or I was before I retired. I’m the one that gives the lost ones hope. Sometimes even justice, my dear.”

That sounded really corny to her at the time, but it eventually moved her because he clearly believed it. In the past few months caring for Gerald, she’s come to see him as a truly good man, though she can’t quite account for his two ex-wives or that he has no children and that throughout the house is not one sign that he has ever loved anyone or been loved back.

“Your blood pressure’s low, but that’s your meds. You still get dizzy?”

“As a drunk at noon.”

Terry smiles behind her mask. She releases the cuff and presses the stethoscope’s diaphragm to Gerald’s polo shirt and hard sternum beneath it.

If Mandi’s heart had sounded like a frightened little animal’s, Gerald’s is as steady as a metronome, though its beating is a tad faint.

“Am I still alive?”

“Today you are.” She pats his shoulder and glances at her watch and counts his respirations. They’re shallow but regular, and she pulls out her notebook, finds the page marked with Gerald’s initials, and records the date and all his vitals. “How long have you had the cold?”

“You make me happy, Terry.”

“Oh? How’s that?”

He nods at the notepad she’s still holding. “You’re still in the last century. Like me.”

“That’s true.” She closes her notebook and puts it away. “I think I may even be old-fashioned.”

“Really? Why do you say that?”

Why are you so repressed and uptight?

Maybe if Gerald were not older than she, and maybe if he were not a retired judge who saw his job as being a beacon in so many people’s raging seas, and maybe if she’d gotten enough sleep last night and hadn’t been listening to the gypsy moths decimate the trees outside her window, the man she was lying beside feeling to her like a stranger, and maybe if she were not beginning to dread visiting her last patient today, a broken boy whom she could no longer deny being drawn to, maybe she would not at this moment be crossing the professional line she rarely crossed, though it’s true that Phyllis did get her to talk about her personal life a bit, she did.

“I shouldn’t be saying this, but my husband wanted us to be swingers, and I just couldn’t do that.”

Gerald takes this in and nods slowly. He looks as if he’s being reminded of an important story he was told long ago but forgot all about.

“I’m sorry. That was very unprofessional of me.” Terry’s cheeks burn, and she pulls off her stethoscope and stuffs it into her bag.

“We’re just two grownups talking, Terry. Don’t give it a thought.”

“Want me to take a look at your meds, Gerald?” She glances at her notepad, her fingers trembling slightly, and she reads over his list of medications: statins and aspirin, blood thinners and beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors when called for.

“That must’ve been painful, my friend.”

For a moment she feels as if she’s the one who had the heart attack. She’s the one who has to take all these meds.

“Sit for a minute, Terry. Retirement can get lonesome, you might have guessed.”

“Why do you think I haven’t retired?” She forces a smile behind her mask and drops her notepad into her purse and sits in the other wingback chair. It’s firm and comfortable, and if she didn’t feel so ashamed by what she just said she’d like to stay here a while.

“My first wife and I knew a couple like that.”

“Swingers?”

“I don’t know about that, but I do know that they had an open arrangement.”

“He wanted that too.”

Gerald’s eyebrows are gray and bushy, his eyes beneath them warm and oddly nonjudgmental for a judge. He’s looking at her like he’s waiting for her to say more, and he appears to her the way she sometimes imagines good therapists must look.

“How on earth could your husband want to share you with another, Terry? That perplexes me. It must have made you feel like he didn’t love you.”

“Yep, it did.” She stands for she can’t believe she said any of this to the Honorable Gerald M. Byrne. She knows too that when she comes back again in a few days she’ll be embarrassed probably even more than she feels right this minute.

“You sure you wouldn’t like that coffee?”

“Yes, but thank you.” Terry grabs her bag and pulls her purse strap over her shoulder. “No questions about your meds, Gerald?”

“I’m fine. My heart man’s been very clear.” Gerald stands, reaches into his back pocket for his handkerchief, and blows his nose.

Heart man.

“You should rest, Gerald. And no more furniture repair, all right?”

“Terry?”

“Yes?”

He’s pushing the handkerchief back into the rear pocket of his khakis, his eyes on hers above her mask. “I appreciate your telling me what you did.”

“Well, I shouldn’t have.”

“The older I get, the more I believe that we should tell each other important things about ourselves. I really do.”

“Even when you’re supposed to be working?”

“In both my marriages, my wives and I stopped listening to one another and so we stopped sharing anything significant and then, well, there was no longer anything to say.”

Walking down Gerald’s hallway, Terry feels better and worse and she’s grateful for the mask. She leaves it on even as she steps out onto the slate walkway. A car drives by way too fast, its windows open and rap music blasting. Gerald merely glances at it as it goes by, crime and punishment someone else’s problem now. He follows her to the driveway, and as Terry opens her rear door and rests her bag and purse on the back seat, he’s saying something she can’t quite hear.

“I’m sorry, what?” She looks at him over the roof of her car. Gerald’s standing beside his Prius, one hand on the trunk, the other in his front pocket.

“I said I’m glad you stood your ground.”

She smiles behind her mask and waves and backs out of Gerald Byrne’s driveway. The grass of the park is so bright-green under the sun, and when she’s two or three blocks away she pulls off her mask and thinks, as if.


Brendan lives in a small town on the Massachusetts–New Hampshire border. When she was a teenager, Terry and her girlfriends would drive along its main drag of strip plazas to buy wine coolers and beer because it was cheaper in New Hampshire and the owner of the packy never asked for their IDs, especially when they wore a lot of eye makeup and halter tops that showed as much cleavage as possible. There was a movie theater not far from there too, and it played only R-rated films, and it was there that she was touched between her legs for the first time by someone other than herself.

His name was Bobby Wright, and he was cute and had big arm muscles he liked to show off in tight T-shirts he wore even in the winter. She let him do it while they were watching a western with a lot of gun fights under a desert sun, and she remembers being embarrassed at how wet and slippery she must have felt to Bobby, his eyes on one man kicking another in the head as he rubbed and rubbed until Terry squeezed his wrist to stop him.

What he’d been doing felt good and was starting to feel even better, but she was also beginning to feel like one of the bad girls, which is just how she feels now pulling into the Dunkin’ Donuts drive-thru one mile from her patient Brendan’s house. Gerald Byrne was glad to hear that she stood her ground, but what she did not tell him and won’t, is that she did that only after trying once to make Kai happy.

But was that all she was trying to do? Because part of her believed that she was “repressed and uptight,” which was nothing to be proud of, but all her life she’d tried to be a good person, which meant obedient. Which meant following the rules.

As a kid she did all her chores at home without ever being asked, and the only times she would not be vacuuming the living room or scrubbing the downstairs bathroom or folding the laundry is if she happened to be sick. At school she sat in the front of every classroom so she could better concentrate on whatever the teacher was saying or writing on the board, and because she was so well-behaved and her grades were always so good, when she was a senior in high school her teachers encouraged her to run for class president, though she became her class’s vice president, the president being Julie Powers, who not only also got perfect grades but was tall and lovely and captain of the field hockey team, and that was that.

Terry was even well-behaved on those Friday and Saturday nights when she’d go out with her friends. They’d usually end up at someone’s house whose parents were away, or they’d go up to Simon’s Woods that had room between the trees for three or four cars, one of them with the 8-track playing, a fire burning, boys and girls drinking and smoking and making out or fighting or throwing things into the fire they shouldn’t, like a dead bird once, the rising smoke making Terry sick. But she rarely drank too much or kissed a boy she didn’t want to kiss, and she always got home on time, and then at college, her grades still very good but harder to earn, she lost her virginity to gentle Gene, and to this day she feels terrible about the way she left him, which was with a short letter she signed, Your Friend, Terry.

For days he called her crying on the phone, but by then she was already seeing exciting, intriguing, and so fully alive Kai Spero, and now she’s pulling up to the drive-through’s speaker, hearing his voice in her head. It’d be good for us.

She orders a hot green tea and two bottles of water from what sounds like a teenage girl, and then Terry’s sitting in her car in the shade of a huge pine tree in the far corner of the parking lot. She sips her tea and watches one car or truck after another pull up to the speaker, everyone, it seems, in need of a pick-me-up.

It happened in the Airstream when the kids were living on campus at their respective colleges. For many years by then, Terry and Kai and their children had been living in their new house in the woods across the street, and it was a happy time, or it should have been. That’s how Terry felt, anyway. For she knew that forever restless Kai was happy too: she could see it in the way he smiled and laughed often, at the way he would pull their kids into hugs and kiss them on their cheeks and foreheads, though Nicholas would pull away because he felt he was too old for that kind of thing; she could see it in how her husband no longer went to his workshop at night but stayed home to cook them elaborate dinners from scratch, and how he wanted them to eat together every night at the candlelit table under the driftwood chandelier he’d built, his jazz playing on the sound system he’d rigged throughout the house, Coltrane or Miles Davis or Ben Webster. She saw it in the way he insisted she sit with him before or after dinner on the deck overlooking the floodplain. Even when the days grew shorter and colder, he’d want to sit together on the outdoor love seat under a blanket and watch the last colors of the day fade into darkness over the marsh through the trees.

And so often it was after they made love that he’d bring it up, the one thing that was keeping his happiness from being complete. He never put it that way or maybe never even thought about it that way, but so many nights she would curl away from him and cry herself quietly to sleep, and Kai would try to comfort her, but she’d jerk her elbow back at him and tell him to go fuck himself or someone else. “Which is what you want to do anyway!”

Then he began to drink too much. The one bourbon he liked to sip while cooking soon became three, and after dinner he wouldn’t stop as he used to. The kids would be in their rooms by then, and he’d put on Brubeck’s “Take Five” and turn it up too loud, and often he drank straight from the bottle. He’d mop the kitchen floor or move to the music alone in the living room, a book of philosophy or ergonomics in one hand, the bottle in the other, and if Terry turned down the music and said, “Haven’t you had enough?” he’d look at her with disdain and what looked to her like disgust at himself for ever marrying such a conventional woman in the first place. She knew he was drunk and that his expressions were distortions, but it hurt her that he looked at her this way. It hurt her because she’d never quite understood what it was he truly loved about average, normal, boring her in the first place.

Not long before Nicholas was born, Terry drove Kai to a skateboarding competition. It was a hot, cloudless day in June, and just before they got there, he reached over and rested his hand on her swollen belly. “I admire your heart, Teresa. Nobody loves like you do.”

It felt good to hear that, but over the years, Kai hurling himself into life, what he’d told her that day began to feel patronizing and like a diminishment. She’d become a mere cheerleader to a man engaged in living a true life, not some “bullshit life.”

Like hers.

It wasn’t always Brubeck he drank to, either; increasingly it was silence, which was worse because now his drunkenness wasn’t even festive or manically productive; it became brooding and morose and on one of those nights, Terry long in bed alone and having just texted Leah because she was out past curfew, their daughter came home and Kai confronted her at the front door.

Terry had gotten out of bed as soon as she heard Leah’s car. From the top of the stairs, Leah standing in the doorway, Terry could see Kai lean too close to their daughter and say, “This is incorrect, Leah. This is not correct.”

The light from the exterior sconces shone down on Leah’s freshly shaved head, her silver nose ring glinting slightly. It was a cold night and from the stairs Terry could see her daughter’s breath leaving her nostrils and mouth. Then Leah’s eyes narrowed at something her father slurred at her, and their daughter said, “Oh fuck off, Dad. You’re fucking drunk.”

The slap was a sound in the air before Terry could even take in the movement of Kai’s raised hand, Leah’s face jerking to the right. She was screaming and shoving her way past him, and Terry was rushing down the steps, yelling, “Stop it! Stop!” and Leah pushed past her. “Fuck you both! I’m calling the cops!”

Which she did. There were the two parked cruisers and the flashing blue across the trunks of their pines and maples and oaks. There was Leah screaming “He hit me!” and a young officer asking if she wanted to press charges. There was Kai standing so very still, his arms crossed, though he kept swaying a bit on his feet, and he looked the way he did whenever he would come across a new challenge of one kind or another, like he was trying to find the most efficient way to arrive at a rigorous conclusion about it all.

There was Kai actually being handcuffed, and now Terry was yelling at Leah and the young officer and his equally young partner that this was ridiculous. “He slapped his daughter. Is that breaking the law?”

“Assault’s assault, Miss.”

It was Kai being driven away, and it was Terry bailing him out, and it was Leah changing her mind about charging her father with assault. Then Kai was back home, and the next morning out on the deck he opened his bourbon bottles one at a time and poured them over the railing, the smell of that whiskey in the air like some sad, liquid truce.

He started going to meetings, but after only three or four he stopped going. Too much “groupthink,” he said. Terry asked him if he thought that was a good idea.

“Not drinking’s a good idea, kookla. It’s the only idea I need.”

And somehow that had worked for him, and now it had been over a year, and their house in the woods felt as if it had been freed from some dark, predatory spirit trapped in the walls.

Kai started a tradition of taking their kids out to dinner once a week, one at a time, Leah with him one week and Nicholas the next, “You know, to make amends.” When they came home, there was often laughter coming through the front door with them, and Terry would smile and wave from the living room, where she’d be on the couch with one of her novels or podcasts, and for a while she had hope that Kai’s needs outside their own bedroom may have dried up along with the bourbon he’d poured onto the ground beneath their deck.

But here they both were on a summer’s Saturday night in the Airstream in their woods across the street.

Terry was sitting next to a man she barely knew, his hand on her thigh, and Kai was sitting across from them in a dark suit and white silk shirt, the man’s wife hip to hip with him. Her high heels were off and her bare legs were crossed at the knee, and she kept rubbing Kai’s shin with her toes, whose nails were painted bright-red.

There was music playing, but for once it wasn’t jazz but some kind of New Age chanting with a light drumbeat and what sounded like a flute from the Andes. Like what they were planning to do together was somehow in the same realm as a group yoga class. Kai had started smoking pot in the afternoons, which he told Terry helped him with his “booze cravings,” and he took a hit off his joint and leaned forward so the man beside Terry could take it.

The man’s name was Norman Fields, and he had thick wrists and big hands and was also wearing a suit, his shoes off, his black dress socks made from two separate weaves. He smelled like dry cleaning and fading deodorant and when he passed the joint to Terry, the tips of his fingers touching hers, he smiled at her while still holding in what he’d just inhaled and it made him look ridiculous.

Terry had never liked pot. The few times she’d smoked it in high school and college, it made her paranoid, and she’d feel herself split into two selves, the one talking and laughing and drinking and the one watching her with nothing but self-loathing and disgust. Is your voice always this high? Do you never let anyone else talk? Why are you laughing at such inane bullshit?

But she took the joint anyway and inhaled deeply and held it in, her eyes on the woman just feet away from her.

She was Norman’s wife, Barbara, and she had a large, lovely figure and newly styled auburn hair that somehow made her brown eyes look warmer, her wide, pretty face in perfect proportion to her shoulders and generous breasts.

They’d gone to dinner at a French restaurant down on Route 1 just north of Boston. It was a halfway point for them. The Fields coming from the south, the Speros from the north, and the dimly lit restaurant was also one where Terry was not likely to see anyone she knew.

They’d met Norman and Barbara Fields years earlier in a Lamaze class when both women were pregnant with their first children, and for a while they stayed in touch—Christmas cards, a mailed birthday gift for one of their kids—but except for a cookout one summer at another Lamaze couple’s house when the kids were two or three, Terry and Kai had not seen these people. Well, Kai had, and it was online.

It was on some kind of swingers chat room where couples could meet each other and then get together. Some people used pseudonyms, Kai told Terry, but a few others used their real names, which of course Kai respected because, “What’s there to be ashamed of, Teresa? It’s nobody’s damn business anyway.”

He began to correspond with Norman, and they met for coffee, and for weeks Kai never let up on her with what “could be a very good thing.”

Terry had yelled at him and she had cried. She had slammed doors and locked herself into the bathroom for over an hour. She had come out and taken her husband’s hand and said, “How could you want me to be with another man? How could you not care?”

“I do care,” he said. “I care about us being free. Freedom won’t kill our love, Teresa. It will only make it deeper. Can’t you see that?”

On her walks she’d think about Barbara and Norman Fields. She’d always liked them. Barbara worked in a bank and was funny and charming and winked at people like she knew just what they were hiding but should never be ashamed about it. Norman owned a trucking company he’d inherited, and he had a sweet combination of the blue-collar boy who’d gone to college and now made a living in an office suspended between those two worlds.

He was over six feet, four inches tall, and in those Lamaze classes he would get down on the floor behind Barbara and fold his long arms and legs around his pregnant wife, and he looked to Terry like a man whose sole purpose was simply to love and protect.

On Terry’s walks down their narrow asphalt road through the woods, she tried to imagine kissing Norman Fields. She saw his long angular face and thin lips, his blond hair that curled slightly at the neck, or did the last time she saw him years ago, and the thought of a kiss did not repulse her. In fact, it began to send a warm airy ripple through her, but it faded quickly, and she could not even begin to imagine having sex with this man.

She was fifty-one years old then and had had only two lovers. She knew this was unusual for a woman of her time. Her friend Sandy alone had slept with fourteen boys and men before she met Michael Ford.

“Fourteen?”

“Oh, honey, probably more than that. I like men and I wasn’t married, so why not?”

“But did you feel anything for them?”

“You bet, sweetie. And it was all in my crotch.” Sandy laughed and got up from the couch to get them more wine. This was at the Fords’ house years before Sandy got sick, the men out on the deck, and Terry sat there staring at the framed photos of the Fords’ three kids along the bookshelves. And while she did not judge her dear friend, Terry just could not imagine opening her legs for a man she did not love.

With Gene and his clumsy hands and careful thrusts, she felt sure that she was making love, that her affection and admiration for this boy was all she needed to give him freely what she gave him. It felt like a fair and pleasant exchange, an unwritten contract between them that this is what lovers do, so we will do it.

But with Kai it was as if her body and his were just the beginning, that they were gateways to someplace dark and beautiful and never ending, and what they did with each other was the only way they could travel to this place together. It was as if it had always been this way, and then came the gathering and gathering that pushed her falling through a doorway with him into a warm, black sea where drowning was impossible and they’d both float on its surface, the spirits of everyone who had ever loved anyone the light that flickered in the distance.

Didn’t he feel that too? And if he did, how could he even think of doing this with anyone else? Did he really believe he could go to their place with a stranger?

She had just reached the concrete bridge over one of the tidal streams feeding the floodplain. It was summer and close to dinnertime, but the sun was still high over the mile-wide stretch of cordgrass, its green blades so fine and soft looking that Terry was constantly moved by their short-lived beauty. And maybe that’s what this swinging thing was with her husband: short-lived. Just another passionate project he would quickly dispatch before moving on to the next. Especially once he discovered how wrong he’d been about it all, for Terry felt sure at that moment that his being with another woman would be a disappointment to him. Yes, there would be physical pleasure, the mere thought of which stabbed at her, but he would soon learn that there was nothing more to it, and so why would he want a kiddie pool when there was an entire ocean available to him?

On the walk back home, she began to feel afraid. She knew that her constant resistance to all this was pushing him away. And she knew that she might lose him, but the fear opening up in her abdomen like a cold cave was not about this. It was about what she knew she had decided to do, which was to try this thing with him, to step into it hand-in-hand so that they could come out the other side stronger and then never have to do it again.

Kai was smiling at her. His hand was on Barbara’s thigh, and his eyes were two lazy slits, his chin raised slightly. It was his You can do it, I know you can smile, but what they were all smoking was kicking in, and Terry’s hair felt like it was being brushed by a swarm of bees. Her husband’s smile was also the same one he’d used on the jealous young wrestler punching him in the face another lifetime ago, but the red on Kai’s lips now was not blood but lipstick, Barbara’s lipstick, and with two fingers at his jawbone she turned his face toward hers and they began to kiss deeply, her palm flat against his chest.

It was as if a rope were being tightened around Terry’s neck, and she wanted to turn away but could not. The Andes flute was a lone bird drifting above a deep valley, and the back of Norman’s hand was lightly touching Terry’s cheek, his other hand heavy and warm halfway up her thigh. She had worn dress pants because the thought of wearing a dress had left her feeling unprotected, but Norman’s hand did not feel dangerous. It felt almost comforting, like the two dogs of her girlhood—Deke and Farraday—whose backs curled against her hip while she lay on the floor watching TV, those big dogs something good she had relied on for years.

Kissing Norman was strange. His chin felt like an obstacle, his nose a vague nuisance, but his lips were soft and he let her be the one to use her tongue first, and this would all be okay if she were a younger her in a different life. She would allow herself to enjoy the newness of this and the obvious gentleness of big, strong Norman Fields, but what she and Kai were doing in that trailer with this couple felt to Terry like she’d walked naked into her son’s or daughter’s bedrooms and squatted over pictures they’d drawn at school and then urinated on them.

In her head came that other Terry, the stoned one: Just get through this. You have to just get through it.

There was movement and the squeak of the Airstream’s floor. There was the smell of Barbara’s perfume, a desert flower. Terry opened her eyes to see Norman’s eyes closed, his tongue sliding over hers as if he was trying to find the other Terry who was telling her not to look at her husband leading Barbara down the hall to one of the kid’s old bedrooms. Just get through this. You just have to get through this or you’ll lose him and you’ll never have with him again what you have had for most of your life: Passion. A true life.

“Is this okay?” Norman’s hand was gone from her thigh, a lightness there, and now it was covering her entire left breast like he wanted to protect it from the elements. He began to squeeze it, and he took her hand and pressed it to the erection in his pants.

She had touched other erections, ones that did not belong to Gene or Kai. A boy at a house party, another in a movie theater, a third in the front seat of her car one winter night in college before she met Gene. There were others too, and all of them came back to her as she touched Norman’s through the black fabric of his dress pants. They were still kissing, and it was almost nice except the Airstream had gotten so quiet, the lone flute the only sound, the chanters silent, and then Terry heard from down the narrow hall a gasp and a moan coming from Barbara, which meant that Kai was going down on her or touching her with his fingers. That rope around Terry’s neck tightened and there was a weight on her chest and when she opened her eyes a hot darkness was squeezing in from the corners.

“You okay?”

She was no longer touching Norman’s erection, nor was she kissing him. No, it seemed that she was crying.

Norman put his arm around her. He squeezed her shoulder. “It’s all right. The first time is weird for everybody.”

Terry shook her head. She dabbed at one eye then the other. The Andes flute hung in the air like a mosquito and she wanted to kill it. But she also wanted to turn it up so that she wouldn’t be able to hear any more sounds coming from down that hallway.

“I was the one who couldn’t do it our first time. So I just watched Barbara and her partner.”

“Partner?”

“Yeah, like tennis.” He smiled at her and lit up the roach and took a deep hit and handed the smoking nub to Terry. She shook her head. He exhaled and said, “It’s more like recreation. But, you know, re-creating.”

“What are you re-creating?”

“Us. Me and my wife. We all get in a rut.”

“I’m not.”

“You sure?”

Norman’s eyes were on hers. She looked down at his massive hand in her lap. From down the hallway came a soft tapping. Slow at first, then faster, then slow again. It was a rhythm she knew well, and now she felt sick and pushed Norman’s hand away and stood, but she’d stood too fast and that darkness at the corners of her eyes moved in, and for a moment she couldn’t see, and the Airstream had become a boat dipping into deep swells.

Norman’s hand was at her back. “You didn’t want to do this, did you?”

She shook her head. The tapping continued, each one a shovel blade lifting and dropping her intestines.

“Here, follow me.”

The chanting had begun again. Norman took her hand and led her down the Airstream’s narrow hallway. She tried to pull away, but he turned to her and lowered his long face to hers and whispered in her ear, “Trust me on this.”

She let him lead her to what used to be Nicholas’s bedroom door. It wasn’t even closed all the way. Norman pulled it open a few more inches, and there, in the light of Terry’s son’s old SpongeBob lamp, was naked Kai on top of naked Barbara, her legs wrapped around his slowly thrusting buttocks.

It was like seeing a car accident or a house fire or a fight in the street.

Barbara’s eyes were closed, her mouth open in a dark oval of pleasure, but it was Kai’s face Terry was staring at. His arms were locked straight, and his eyes were closed too, but his face was contorted in concentration. It was an expression of his Terry knew well. It was Kai confronting a difficult question, one of design or maybe execution, and she felt immediately better because she could see that this was not what he’d imagined it would be. She could see that he was already trying to find a way to make things work better than this.

Still, she could feel her heart being stepped on inside her and she could not watch any longer.

Then she and Norman were outside. She doesn’t remember how they got there, but it felt better to be in the open air that smelled of pine pitch and gravel. Above the trees was a spangle of midsummer stars, and she and Norman were leaning against his Mercedes sedan. He put his arm around her and pulled her in close, her cheek against his chest, and they stood like that for a long while. His heart was beating so steadily, an obviously healthy man, and it was as if he’d been her dear friend for many, many years and when he leaned down and kissed her, she kissed him back. She kept seeing Kai’s contorted face, and she wanted to slap it, to punch it, and soon she and Norman were inside his car in the passenger’s seat, Norman’s eyes closed, and she was straddling him with her hands on either side of his thick neck, receiving him and giving it back to him, and fifty feet away were the soft lights of her family’s Airstream where Kai was fucking a woman who’d clearly been enjoying it, but Terry was not.

Yes, there was the pleasure of being filled and emptied and filled again, but part of her felt like she was at work tending to one of her male patients, extracting his catheter or changing the dressing of a wound. What she was doing was giving another what he needed while what she was doing was—what?

Getting back at Kai. Because did he really want her to be doing what she was doing? But that was such bullshit because this is what he wanted, and now she was giving him just what he thought he needed, not what she needed. Did he even ask her what she needed? Did he ever ask her?

Norman was making small grunting sounds, his mouth open the way his wife’s mouth had been open, and how had it come to pass that this was perhaps the first time Terry had ever asked herself this? Looking at Norman’s slightly sweating face was like looking at the photograph of a stranger taken years before you were born, and then his big hands locked around her hips and held her still and she felt scared for a moment because he was so very strong, but it was she who had the power. It was she who made him let out that long moan as he came into the condom she’d rolled onto him moments earlier with hands so very used to tending to others’ bodies.

Soon she was walking home. There was a half-moon through the trees, and the only sounds were her footsteps on the gravel. Norman had insisted on walking her, but she refused him. She needed to be alone, and she did not want him to even see the house that was her and her children’s home.

When she reached the asphalt, she could hear the men’s voices back through the woods, and she crossed the moon-lit road and walked fast down her long gravel driveway. She could still feel what she’d smoked, that other Terry in her head, though it seemed like a Terry who’d grown old, and now this old woman was sitting in some darkened room nodding her head at what Terry had just done.

Well, you were right, weren’t you?

Yes, I was.

You need to love the man first, don’t you?

Yes. I do.

And now Terry was crying again. She kept seeing Kai’s face and his thrusting ass and Barbara’s oval of a mouth, and as Terry unlocked the front door to her house and stepped inside, she locked it on him, even though he had his own keys. Then she went upstairs and grabbed her nightgown and toothbrush and carried them down the hall to the guest room, where she slept for three weeks.


Brendan’s home is a small one-story set back in a grove of spruce trees. His mother’s Volkswagen is parked beside a doghouse, the dog long gone, and its shingled roof is covered with moss. Terry parks her car near the open entrance to the barn. In its shadows are the wooden stalls that used to hold dairy cows, but now they’re filled with junk, mainly rusted farming implements that Brendan’s stepfather collects and tries to sell at auctions and antique shows. In the center of the concrete floor is Brendan’s yellow Corvette, its top and windshield covered with a blue tarp. It’s where he shot himself last December after someone sent him a video of his girlfriend blowing his best friend, though over the past few months caring for this young man, it’s become clear to Terry that this was only part of why he stole his stepfather’s pistol one snowy morning and carried it out to his car in the barn.

Brendan’s mother answers the door. She’s a petite woman, and she’s wearing a red mask, her reading glasses perched on top of her head. Her hair is graying at the roots, and her slightly bloodshot eyes exude intelligence and an unrelenting worry.

“I’m in a Zoom meeting, Terry. But please let me know if you need anything.” She touches Terry’s arm, then turns and hurries back to the kitchen, where she’s set up her home office. Brendan said that his mother had always wanted to finish college and then get a PhD in history, but she has shitty taste in men and now she works from home in property management.

Brendan’s room is down a short hallway. Its vinyl parquet floors are scratched by the long-dead dog, and on the walls are framed color-pencil sketches of a little girl in a sundress and a straw hat, her eyes so large and round they look frightening to Terry.

Brendan’s door is wide open—he was asked by his mother to never close it, even when he sleeps—and Terry can hear his classical music. He plays it on an actual record player, and he owns a large collection of vinyl albums. The one playing now is almost disturbing in its intensity. It has a lot of cutting violins in it and thumping drums and other instruments she can’t make out, though every time she comes here Brendan will do his best to educate her on the music that makes his life “not so fucking shitty.”

He’s sitting in a caned chair in front of his massive fish tank, his head lowered over whatever he’s doing on his phone. His dark curly hair needs a trim, and he’s nodding his head to the music, his bare foot lifting and dropping in time.

It still confuses her that a young man like this would want to die, and as she knocks on the door casing, she knows that this is one reason she’s drawn to him—her hope that she can convince him, in her own small way, not to want to shoot himself in the chest again.

He doesn’t look up from his phone. She steps closer and sets down her bag and purse, and she can see what he’s looking at, a topless young woman, her chin raised and her lips pursed for a kiss. Brendan swipes his finger across the screen and here’s another young woman, this one dressed but staring into her camera so directly her intentions are clear. Terry steps back so as not to embarrass Brendan, and is this jealousy she’s feeling?

“Oh hey.”

“Hey there.” She nods in the direction of Brendan’s record player. “Who’re we listening to today?”

“Holst.”

“It’s very dramatic.”

“The Bringer of War.” He sets his phone screen down beside the fish tank. Violins now give way to drums that beat louder and louder, and Terry doesn’t like it.

“That’s what they call Mars. Did you know that?”

“No, I sure didn’t.” She pulls out her stethoscope. Behind Brendan a big orange fish swims languidly alongside the glass.

“He composed this during World War I. He did one for every planet, but this one’s bringing me down. I was about to change it.” He stands slowly and winces as he does. He’s tall and wearing what he always wears, a black pullover shirt and black jeans and black socks.

At his record player, he pulls the needle away from the album, and the room goes quiet. There’s only the soft gurgle of his tank’s filter, a man’s voice from his mother’s Zoom meeting out in the kitchen.

“How’s your pain today, hon?”

“My dreams are worse.”

“I’m sorry.”

“Why are you sorry?” Brendan carefully slides the record back into its sleeve, and Terry wants to say that she’s simply sorry he’s suffering, that’s all. But sometimes it’s best to say nothing, and so she stands there taking in Brendan’s unmade bed and the fake paneling of his walls. They’re bare and still hold bits of masking tape and a few thumbtacks from all the posters and photographs that hung there for years, the ones he tore down, To cleanse myself, I guess, right before he walked out into that barn.

“Music or quiet?”

“Quiet’s good. Here sit, let me look at your back.”

With Brendan, Terry often feels as if she’s speaking to her own son, but even now, as he walks slightly stooped back to his chair and pulls off his shirt, his entrance wound nearly healed and the size of a dime, Terry can’t deny another feeling opening up in her, and she doesn’t like it.

Brendan’s upside-down phone emits light from underneath. He ignores it and sits back down slowly then leans forward so Terry can inspect his scar. Its raised flesh is pink and shaped like a volcano, and when she first started caring for him, his staples had just been pulled and the drainage had to be dealt with, but now it’s dry and there’s no redness and she tells him to put his shirt back on.

“Can you help me?”

“Of course.” She picks his shirt up off the bed where he tossed it. She shakes it once, his eyes closed tight as he lifts his arms and she pulls the sleeve openings over his hands and down, her fingertips sliding against his ribs before she steps away and grabs her blood pressure cuff.

“I wasn’t looking at porn, by the way.”

“ ’Scuse me?” She wraps the cuff around his arm and starts to inflate it.

“When you walked in. It’s a dating app.”

“That’s good, Brendan. You should date.” Her mouth is dry. She would like a tall glass of water. She pulls on her stethoscope’s ear pieces and holds up one finger because he’s still talking and she needs to concentrate. She releases the pressure on the cuff and pulls it off Brendan’s upper arm and writes his numbers into her notebook. “Your BP’s a bit high.”

“You ever go on those sites?”

“Nope. Never have. You still taking your Cymbalta?”

“I fucking hate them.”

“You tell your case manager that?”

“Not the drugs, the apps.” He glances up at her. “It’s just tits and ass.”

She wants to ask him what he doesn’t like about that. She holds the digital thermometer to his forehead. At first he closes his eyes, but then he opens them and stares straight at it.

“Your temp is perfect.”

“But I don’t look at their bodies anyway.”

“Really? That’s hard to believe.”

“I look into their eyes. I think I’ve looked into thousands of them.”

“What’re you looking for?”

“I don’t know. Emotion, I guess.”

She pulls on her stethoscope and presses the diaphragm to Brendan’s chest, careful to stay away from the wound. His heartbeat is strong and steady, and she shakes her head at how so very close he came to shooting it still forever.

“What?”

“Your heart’s perfect too, Brendan.” She pulls off her stethoscope and starts counting his respirations, though with his black pullover on it’s hard to see the movement of his chest. She almost asks him to take off his shirt again but does not.

“You do your breathing exercises today?”

“Maybe because the eyes can’t bullshit you.”

“No?” She records his pulse in her notebook and thinks what a naïve and overly romantic thought that is.

“I mean, look at this one.” He reaches for his phone and winces. “Fuck.”

“What time did you take your Tylenol this morning?”

“That shit doesn’t work. I need the real thing, Terry.”

He says her name like they’re the same age and have known each other for years. She knows this is just a generational trait, that people of his time don’t acknowledge the hierarchy of age the way hers did, but it feels more personal to her than this, and now he’s holding his glowing phone up to her.

The screen is taken up by a young woman in a bikini, her lower back arched to pronounce her buttocks. There’s the tattoo of a cocktail glass on her hip, and her hair is pulled away from her face, and she’s in the sunshine on what looks like the rear deck of a house.

“See? She’s smiling, but she’s scared.”

“She doesn’t look scared to me.”

“Look at her left eye.”

Terry leans a bit forward and stares at this young girl’s blue left eye. But the kid just looks immature and reckless to Terry, a child playing with fire.

“Look at the pupil. See how dark it is? She’s terrified that she’ll only get left-swiped.”

“Left-swiped?”

“Rejected.”

Rejected.

“Why the left eye, Brendan?”

“It’s the one over the heart.”

“You’re a romantic, aren’t you?”

“Define romantic.” He’s looking up at her. He has a wide jaw, and his cheeks are pale and have the smoothness of a young man who doesn’t need to shave very often. His eyes are narrowed slightly on hers, but he doesn’t look skeptical. He looks like whatever she tells him could be the key to open the door to the life he’s locked himself out of, and she wishes she’d kept her mouth shut.

“I just mean that love is important to you, Brendan. That’s all.”

He keeps his eyes on hers. He taps away the half-naked girl and sets his phone back against the fish tank.

“Ready for our walk?” It’s part of her treatment plan for him, daily walks to get his circulation going to avoid blood clots, a real danger for gunshot victims, but as he nods and slowly stands, his handsome face wincing once again as his shattered scapula makes itself known, she’s aware that she said “our walk” and not “your walk,” for it’s come to be her favorite time of her entire week.


It’s late afternoon and the day has gotten cooler. At her car, she sets her purse and bag down on the passenger’s seat, pulls off her mask, and pulls on the leather jacket Kai bought her years ago when they were in Italy. It’s brown and clings to her figure nicely, and she knows damn well she could have grabbed one of her frumpier jackets this morning instead.

A fading sunlight slants down through the pines, and Brendan waits for her in rubber boots he stepped into barefoot. As they head for the trail behind the barn, he pulls on a black wool cap that makes his face look older and he glances at his half-covered Corvette like some errand he forgot to do.

The trail is a narrow two-track, its center hump covered with dead pine needles. On one of their earlier walks, Brendan told her how he used to race his stepfather’s ATV up and down these trails for hours. It was an incongruous image to her, this sensitive, classical music–listening boy charging through these lovely woods on some loud gas-sucking machine. When she asked him what he liked about doing that, he just shrugged and said, “I like to go fast.”

Brendan’s walking to her left, his shoulders slightly stooped. She’s glad for his wool cap, but he should have a jacket on, not to mention socks on his feet. But Brendan already has one mother hovering over him, and Terry won’t be another. She says, “You never answered me.”

“What’d you ask?”

“Your breathing exercises. Have you done them today?”

“Maybe.”

“Your lung is still healing, Brendan. You need to give it some help.”

He picks up a thin fallen branch and breaks off its smaller limbs and uses it as a walking stick. He looks over at her. “That’s a cool jacket.”

“Thank you.”

“Where’d you get it?”

“My ex-husband.” Funny how she just said “ex.”

“Why’d you two split up?”

“That’s personal, Brendan.”

“So I can tell you things, but you can’t tell me?”

“I’ve told you about my kids.”

He nods, and they walk quietly for a while. The woods smell like pine needles and damp bark. There’s the sound of his walking stick tapping the ground, the clomping of his rubber boots. “They ever try to off themselves?”

“No. But my daughter had a tough time for a while.” Saying this, Terry feels like a bad mother, for Leah is still having a tough time, isn’t she?

Brendan glances over at Terry. He takes in her face and her body and her sensible shoes. “When I say my dreams are worse, I don’t mean at night.”

“No?”

“That’s what my fucking case manager doesn’t get. They happen all day.”

“Even now?”

“Like, I can see these woods and I can see you, but—I see other shit too.”

“Like what, Brendan?”

He stops walking. He touches his chest with two fingers. “I can feel Ralphie’s Glock.”

She nods and is about to ask him what that feels like, but he’s tapping his stick hard on the ground and stares at the shallow hole it’s making. “I’m looking out through my windshield at my house and the snow’s falling and I’m playing Mahler on my phone, and like, part of me can’t believe I’ve finally found the balls to do this, but I’m doing it and, I mean, this almost gives me hope that if I can do this then I can change, but now I hate myself for pussing out and I pull the trigger and you can’t believe what it feels like.”

“What?”

“Like you’re being stabbed with an electric knife.”

He turns and starts to walk again. “And like it’s on fire too. But you don’t really feel anything. I mean, you do, but it’s not what you thought it would be and then you wake up and the pain is so sick you can’t believe it.”

“You go through this every day, Brendan?”

“No. Not all of it.” He stops walking and tosses his stick into the trees. “Just me and Mahler and the snow coming down on my house.”

“Do you feel better talking about it?”

“With you. Not with that psych ward bitch.”

Terry doesn’t know what to say to this. She’s thirsty and scolds herself for not bringing along the bottles of water she’d bought for this walk, especially for Brendan, who should stay hydrated. She’s about to suggest that they go back for them, but he’s looking straight at her face, his hands deep in his pockets.

“Know what I learned there?”

“What?”

“All my life I’ve felt like a fuckup.”

He’s told her this before, how he never finished high school and that he’s twenty-four and lives with his parents. How he gets fired from every job he’s ever had. But there’s something different in his tone now.

“I used to think it was just me. But that place was full of losers. I mean, there were so fucking many of them.”

“That must’ve made you feel better, right?”

“What, to be King of the Losers?”

“That’s your word, not mine.”

He turns his head and coughs.

“Let’s go back and get your jacket and some water, okay?”

His eyes are on hers. He pulls his hands out of his front pockets and crosses his arms. “Everybody wanted to fuck me. Well, not everybody, but quite a few. And that’s against the rules.”

Terry doesn’t quite know what to say to this. Whatever tiny flare of jealousy she felt seeing him look at young women on his phone is gone. She’s a sixty-year-old nurse whose job it is to help this boy who is younger than her son, and it seems important that she not interrupt this moment for him to go get a jacket.

“And this made you feel like a king?”

“You think I’m an asshole for saying that?”

“I’m just listening, hon.”

“You say love is important to me, but my fucking generation doesn’t even know what it is. They just want to hook up.”

“You must’ve felt flattered anyway, no?” She immediately regrets saying this. It’s objectifying and slightly flirtatious, and Brendan turns and walks down the trail.

They’re moving quickly, and she can see that he’s getting agitated, shaking his head back and forth at perhaps a conversation in his head or what she just said, or maybe he can’t get out of his mind that music and falling snow on the other side of his car’s windshield. It seems to be the time for her to say something, but what? She’s no psychologist. She’s just a nurse, his nurse, and while she’s not pleased at herself for forgetting the water, at least they’re walking at a pace that can only be good for Brendan’s circulation.

“Know what my girlfriend texted me after I did it?”

“What?”

“You’re such a loser, Brendan. I can’t believe you did that over nothing.”

Funny how Kai used that same word. Funny how he spoke through their guest room door saying it meant nothing to me.

Then why’d you do it?

And he went on, talking in a low voice about suffocating conventions this and monogamy prison that, about true agency and an authentic life.

But what was inauthentic about being faithful to someone you love? Wasn’t there freedom in what only they shared with each other? Weren’t they free then to just go deeper and deeper with it?

“That’s why I wear black now.”

“Because you’re mourning something?”

“No, because it’s nothing, but it’s everything.”

“I’m not sure what you mean.”

He stops and picks up a short pine branch. It’s thin, a few sprigs of green needles hanging from it. He drops it and says to her, “Know what colors make black?”

“No, but let’s keep walking, okay? Keep that circulation going.”

“All of them. The three primaries, anyway. But black is an absence of color. See? Everything makes nothing.” He turns and starts down a short hill. At the bottom of it, the late-afternoon sun lies in a swath over three wide planks on concrete blocks in the stream. It’s cooler down here, and at the top of the rise on the other side is the neighbor’s chain-link fence. Brendan hates that neighbor because the other man who owned that land allowed Brendan to ride his ATV through his fields, while this one put up a fence.

Brendan’s waiting for her on the footbridge. His hands are on his hips, his face raised to the sun, and his eyes are closed. She steps closer to him. There’s the trickling of water over rocks and fallen trees, the smell of wood rot, and on the grassy bank is a rusted oil drum lying on its side that she doesn’t remember ever seeing before. It’s so ugly lying there, and it makes her wonder what else she’s missed.

“My back hurts like fuck, Terry. You sure you can’t get me something?”

“That’s your doctor’s decision, hon. I’m sorry.”

He opens his eyes and half smiles at her, then he slowly lowers himself onto the wood plank and pulls off his rubber boots and sticks his bare feet into the stream. “I’m done with killing myself, you know.”

“I’m happy to hear that.”

“My fucking ex-girlfriend says that what she did was nothing, but it was everything to me.”

“I can understand that.”

He squints up at her like she can’t possibly understand anything. “That’s why I like talking to you.”

“Oh? Why’s that?”

“At least you try to get it.”

“I’m sure I’m not the only one, Brendan.”

“This water’s like ice. You should do this.”

“Too cold for me.” She crosses her arms and is ready to head back, but she can’t deny enjoying what he just said about her.

He pulls his feet out of the water. He starts to stand but then shakes his head. “Can you help me up? It’s like there’s an ice pick sticking in it.”

He scoots himself around to face her, his bare feet big and wet, and she half squats and grasps his two hands and pulls.

“Fuck, fuck.” His face is pale, and he steps into his rubber boots that are too big for him and must be his stepfather’s, an apparently large man Terry has still never met.

“You all right?”

“You think a person can be proud of himself but ashamed of himself at the same time?

“I think so.” She and Norman Fields. Pushing herself to do something that she did not want to do. Almost a pride in that. But not really. No, she can’t call that pride.

A squirrel skitters up a tree trunk onto a blighted branch, and Terry thinks of the gypsy moths who’ve been eating her trees’ leaves all day long. This makes her feel irresponsible and again like she’s being punished somehow.

“ ’Cuz I want to bitch-slap myself for this pain I’ve got. But like, I’m proud too, you know? It takes balls to shoot yourself.”

Terry wants to ask him if he’s thought about what else he might do with that kind of courage, but he’s walking fast up the hill, his rubber boots knocking against his shins, and she follows him.

“For a long time I thought about shooting Kacey too.”

“You’re joking, right?”

“Know what I did with my feelings for her?”

“What?”

“I took them and I mixed them with other feelings and now it’s all just nothing. I made it black.”

“Does that help?”

He shrugs. “It’s not anything anymore. They cancel each other out. It’s what I’m gonna do now with everything. Make it all black.”

At the top of the rise, Terry’s breathing harder, and she can see through the trees the barn’s roof under a pale sky. She’s broken into a light sweat under her clothes. “I have to be honest, Brendan. That sounds kind of depressing.”

“Why? It’s helping me, and I came up with it myself. No bullshit psych ward therapy. Just me.”

“But it seems like you’re trying not to feel anything.”

“No, I still feel it, but it’s not so overwhelming. It’s why I turned off that Holtz record. The drums were turning into a solo, and I just can’t do solos anymore. They hurt too much. But if the drums are mixed in with other colors, I can get through it, see?”

“Brendan?”

“What?”

“I think it’s great that you’re trying to—”

“Live?”

“Yes.”

He shrugs and starts walking again. “I’m still a fuckup, Terry.”

She’s walking to his right now, and she’s about to say something to that, but he smiles over at her and says, “But I’m turning that thought black too.”

“Is it helping?”

“I guess. Even fuckups are also other things.”

At her car, she pulls the two water bottles from her console and hands one to Brendan. He thanks her, and she twists hers open and drinks. The water is cool and she’s grateful for it, but Brendan hasn’t opened his. He’s staring at his yellow Corvette in the barn, at the blue tarp covering its top and half its windshield.

“Know why that tarp’s on it?”

“No, why?”

“ ’Cuz my mother doesn’t want to even see it. She made Ralphie cover it, but he’s too cheap to buy a bigger fucking tarp.” Brendan twists open his water bottle and nods in the direction of his house. “It’s like I shot my mother too. I don’t feel good about that.” He takes a long drink from his water bottle, his Adam’s apple rising and falling, his eyes closed to the sky.

On her drive north up the highway, Terry keeps hearing Brendan’s voice, “I took them and mixed them up with other feelings, and now it’s all just nothing.”

On one level this sounds to her like mental illness. But on another—and her face warms thinking this—this is the very thing she’s done herself. Taken all she’s ever felt about her marriage and separation from Kai and stuffed it into some glass jar inside her where it has all festered into black, where she now feels little to nothing, where she seems to be hanging between two lives.

After three weeks of sleeping in the guest room she’d had enough. She’d had enough of avoiding sitting down to dinner with her husband. She’d had enough of leaving the house for work every morning without talking to him, and she’d had enough of going up to the guest room early in the evenings whenever he tried to pull her aside to talk.

But more than any of that, she’d had enough of trying to keep Kai from wanting to sleep with other women. How could she change what he wanted?

But the thought of losing him was as terrifying as imagining their house burning down with all of them in it. And so she and Kai would have to see someone, that’s all. They would have to get some professional help on this. Some man or woman who’d seen all kinds of marriages in all kinds of trouble and would surely know how to help them.

But did she not know her husband at all? This man who quit drinking without “groupthink”? This man who all his life taught himself how to do one thing after another?

“We don’t need that, Teresa.”

It was late, and they were both sitting on the sofa in the living room, she at one end and he on the other. He needed a shave, and his eyes had the lifting haze of one who’d been high hours earlier but no longer. He was wearing a white T-shirt splattered with green paint. She had no idea what he’d been painting or why, and she didn’t care.

“How can you say that, Kai? I don’t even know you anymore. Only you and me eternally?” She lifted her wineglass, but her throat began to close up and her eyes filled and she hated herself for it.

Kai stood and sat beside her. “I meant that. I still mean it.” He touched her neck. His thumb began rubbing her skin under her hair.

“So you’ll stop?” She turned to him. His lips parted like he was about to say something, but he just looked off at the dark front window and something fell away inside her and kept falling. “You’re still doing it, aren’t you?”

He looked at her but said nothing.

“You are, aren’t you? Only without me this time.”

“Yes.”

She stood faster than she’d ever stood in her life. Looking down at him was like staring at a scorpion on her couch. “With who? Fucking Barbara again?”

“Your jealousy is petty, Teresa. Can’t you see that?”

“So now you’re going to insult me?”

“I told you when we first started that we were eternal, that we were meant for the immensities.”

“Oh you’re so full of shit. What does that have to do with hurting me, Kai? You’re hurting me.” She almost started crying again, but she crossed her arms and shook her head and made herself stop. She would not give him that. Nope. No way.

“Teresa, you say that what we have is special, but how can we know how special it is if we don’t test its integrity?”

“We’re not one of your projects, Kai. I am not one of your fucking projects.”

“But we are, kookla. Our marriage is a project. Everyone’s is.” He sat back and intertwined his fingers behind his neck. “When I’m with someone else, it’s like I’m swimming out in deep space away from our ship. But I’ve discovered that I can always feel us behind me. It’s like this warm solid mass, and every time I come back to you and me I can see how well-made it is, how it’s built to last. But—”

“But what, Kai? What?”

“The way you’re behaving, it’s putting fissures in it. It’s—”

“The way I’m behaving?”

“Yes, Teresa. You’re the one who doesn’t trust how strong we are.”

“Trust? Fucking trust? What would you know about trust, Kai? You’ve destroyed it. You’ve—” She was moving, snatching her car keys and driving fast down their gravel driveway, driving faster up the highway in the dark, her headlights lighting up wherever it was she was going.

For a long while she cried, and then she stopped crying. She took an exit and found herself in a beach town. It was a place she would sometimes drive to in the summer with her friends, and now she drove south along its concrete seawall. She rolled her windows down and could hear the surf out on the sand, could smell the vast black ocean.

Immensities. Oh she wanted to take him out into that immensity and drown him. She was being petty? She was putting cracks in their fucking ship?

It was late at night, but when she got to the strip the sidewalk was filled with groups of young women in shorts and bikini tops, with boys in T-shirts, their muscled arms tattooed and sunburned. There was DJ music blasting from a club, an obese couple walking a dog. There was a cop leaning against his cruiser, his arms crossed, talking to a shirtless man he seemed to know, and there were the smells of fried dough and dried beer and the engine exhaust from the three motorcycles cruising slowly in front of her. On the back of the T-shirt of the last rider, a man with a short gray braid, was printed If you can read this, the bitch fell off.

The bitch? Terry wanted to accelerate and send him sprawling off the road. Then she was past the strip and pulling to the sidewalk of an apartment complex built on steel piers. Its first floor was ten feet off the ground and beneath it, under the light of naked bulbs, was a pickup truck filled with camping gear and the bicycles of small children.

Nicholas and Leah. She could feel them floating away on their own ships as hers was breaking apart. She picked up her cell phone and tapped her way to Kai’s number.

“Yes, Teresa.”

“I don’t want you there when I come back.” She almost said home, but that word sat inside her like a hot stone.

“You’re not being rational right now.”

“Kai, if you don’t leave that house I swear to Christ I will never step foot in it again, you hear me?”

A man was walking by Terry’s car. He was talking into his phone and smoking a cigarette, and he stopped and stared at Terry and she yelled out at him, “This is none of your fucking business!”

“Of course it’s my business, kookla.” Kai’s voice had the slightly coaxing tone he would use on Leah when she was a teenager and always so angry and depressed, and if he were sitting beside Terry she felt sure that she’d punch that superior expression right into his face. “And I don’t want you in the Airstream either, I want you away from me. You hear me, Kai? Away!” She threw her phone at the dashboard and it bounced onto the passenger’s seat and she was crying so hard it burned her throat and eyes.

The man on the sidewalk was still standing there, smoking his cigarette and watching her. His glowing phone was just inches from his face, and she could see that it was a kind face, that he was concerned for her, and this made her stop crying.

She wiped her eyes and nose with the back of her arm and put her car in gear, and when she got back to her house in the woods, it looked like someone else’s house.

Kai’s Jeep was gone, but he’d left on the lights in the living room and kitchen and the one over their front door too. As she sat behind the wheel of her car, her family’s home looked like the set for some play about a man and a woman and their children, but now the show was over and this set in the woods was empty and no longer needed.

That night she slept in her own bed again, but it felt too big, and she lay there wondering where her husband had gone. For despite all their friendships with other couples, Kai had no real friends of his own. He’d been a loner all his life, a man who now needed to swim off into orbit away from the “warm solid mass” that they had become.

For a brief moment she nearly felt sorry for him; she nearly felt that she’d caged some wild creature and now she’d finally set him free. But then that hot stone inside her began to flare up at this man who for all of their marriage did whatever he felt like doing, this son of a bitch who dared to say that it was she who was hurting them, it was she who was being petty, it was she who did not dare to live an authentic life.

Then her best friend got sick, and it was months of Terry working, then driving to the Fords’ house or to the hospital and later to hospice, the walls of Sandy’s room covered with flowered wallpaper.

Most afternoons Michael would be there along with his and Sandy’s three kids, Michael sitting in a chair near the bed, one of their daughters lying on the mattress curled against her mother. She was down to ninety-eight pounds then, but her pain was under control and for days at a time she was lucid and often even cheerful.

Terry felt sure that she was putting this on for her family, especially her children, but on one of those rare times when she and Sandy were alone, Michael having taken the kids out for dinner to “let these girls visit,” Sandy told her that no, it was not an act.

“Dying teaches you one big thing, honey.”

Terry was holding Sandy’s tiny, bony hand in both of hers. “What’s that?”

“All we have is right fucking now. And right now my kids are healthy and I’m with all three of them and they’re with me, and—” She had to stop to take a breath. Her long gray hair was gone, and she wore a pink woolen cap her youngest daughter had knitted for her. Her cheeks were hollow and the color of ash. “I have been loved, Terry. My husband has loved me, and—”

“What, hon?”

“Do you know how many times your husband has come to visit me?”

Terry shook her head. She did not want to know, but she already knew because that was Kai, this man who all their lives together would give her that You can do it, I know you can smile just before he turned and walked away.

“You deserve a man who’s going to really love you, honey.”

There were other visits after that, dozens of them, and in some of those Sandy wasn’t so cheerful, especially when her pain got far worse. But soon she was no longer able to speak at all, and then Terry was standing with the others, dressed in black and sweating under the sun, Kai standing just a few feet away in sunglasses and that same suit he wore the night of Norman and Barbara Fields.

After, as everyone was drifting to their cars among the headstones, he was leaning against Terry’s car. His arms and ankles were crossed, and as she got closer, her heart jolting in her chest, he nodded at her and said, “Isn’t it time I came home?”

“No.” She was not surprised at what came out of her mouth, yet he was so handsome in his suit leaning against her car, and looking at him was like looking at Nicholas or Leah or even Terry’s own face in the mirror. She had been with this man for so long that he was as much a part of her as her own limbs.

Kai took off his sunglasses and stepped closer. She was opening her driver’s side door and he stopped it with his hand and motioned his head in the direction of where they’d just been.

“We won’t be here forever, Teresa.”

“Don’t you patronize me.” She pushed the door open enough to climb into her hot car and looked up at him and said, “You couldn’t have visited her one fucking time, Kai?”

He put his sunglasses back on. “I wanted to give them their privacy.” He said this in the same tone he would use on her whenever she’d let him down in some way, the mildly exasperated instructions of a teacher who expected more from his student. I thought I asked you to buy fennel. I believe you said you’d be taking my car in for a tune-up this morning. I thought we agreed that Nicholas has to do his homework before he picks up his guitar.

His wife his project. His marriage to her a fucking ship with an escape hatch just for him.

“You’re so full of shit, Kai.” She pulled her door closed and started the engine and pulled away from him without looking back.

In the months that followed, she did not see or hear from Kai except for the two times when he’d let himself into their house while she was at work. This was to retrieve more clothes or books or the rest of his CDs, both times leaving her a note on their memo pad near the phone telling her he’d been there and why.

His penmanship had always been horrible, an uneven scrawl of words printed too closely together. It looked to her like the product of an unbalanced mind, especially as she read those two notes he signed nearly the same way. The first gave her the address of the condo where he was living, and he ended it with: I’m here when you’re ready. The second: You know where to find me, Teresa. With love— Kai

With love? Not love?

But that was the problem, wasn’t it? And then that long-ago afternoon came to her when she was dropping off her husband, a grown man, to a skateboard park, his hand on her knee as he told her that no one loved like she did—Christ, it was an admission of guilt, for he was telling her that that was the one thing he did not, could not, or simply did not want to do. Yes, he’d been a loving father to their kids, but when she really thought about it, had he been? All those brain-building board games he played with them after dinner, the banning of a TV in their childhoods, the high-protein, nervous system–enriching meals he’d make for them, his insistence that they find a sport to compete in, and the more vigorous and challenging the better; these weren’t nurturing acts of love, they were a punch list for the construction projects that were his children. And was it for their happiness? Or was it so that Nicholas and Leah would go out into the world as admirable ambassadors representing the country of Kai fucking Spero?

Not long after Leah dropped out of graduate school, she called Terry from New York and said, “Dad just ghosted me.”

Terry knew the term, but hearing it in this context made her sit down at the kitchen table. “What do you mean, honey?”

“Just what I said, Mom. He says he doesn’t want to hear from me until I’m back in school.”

“Oh, Leah.” Terry was about to say your father is a self-absorbed piece of shit, but since she’d kicked Kai out of the house, she’d been careful to leave the kids out of it. When Nicholas asked over the phone if they were getting a divorce, Terry only said, “We’re taking a break,” and then she changed the subject and asked her son how his music was coming along.

“Leah, honey, your dad—”

“Is a narcissistic asshole, Mom.”

And then came Michael, a man who knew how to love, and did she let him in too soon? Didn’t his steadfast attention to her add a bright color that helped to turn everything she was feeling—betrayed, lonely, and lost—into one big soupy mess?

In Sandy’s last days, Michael never left her side. He got into the bed with her and read her poetry. He sang her liturgical songs from his churchgoing youth. If the kids weren’t in the room, he told her stories of them when they were very young, and he gave her sponge baths and stroked her bald head and kissed her sweaty temples.

Over a year after burying his wife, he now turned his care to Terry. He would cook for her—and not the showy dishes that Kai would but those that Michael happened to know Terry liked. The bland but comforting meals of her childhood: homemade macaroni and cheese, meatloaf and green peas, fried chicken and mashed potatoes.

As he cooked in Terry’s kitchen, Michael would pour her more wine and ask about her day, and it was clear that he was truly interested in whatever she would tell him, even if what she told him was unpleasant, like having to change a colostomy bag on a disoriented patient, or packing an infected bedsore that had opened up to the size of a small fist, or having yet one more resident die from this virus reaching its invisible fingers around the world.

After dinner, they would finish their wine together on the couch, his arm around her, and they would talk of their children, or maybe a case that Michael was preparing for, and often, Sandy. They would tell stories of her, and it would be hard not to laugh because Sandy had always been life-loving, funny, and irreverent Sandy. Only once did Michael bring up Kai, and it was in a tone Terry was not used to hearing from him.

His voice sounded somehow smaller and not unlike it had that first night he had knocked on her door half-drunk and so fully broken.

“What about him, Mike?”

“I don’t know. You tell me how he wanted you to be with other men, but I was his friend, Terry.”

“Meaning what? That I still belong to him? Don’t give me that patriarchal bullshit, Mike. Please.”

“It just feels weird sometimes, that’s all.”

“Should we stop doing this then?” When she asked this, she could feel herself hoping he would say yes. But he looked hurt and he put his big hand on her thigh and shook his head. “I’d rather not. Would you?” He was leaning forward slightly, his smooth cheeks flushed from the wine, his eyes small in their pleading.

“No, this is nice.” She rested her hand on his. “Let’s just take it slow.”

He kissed her then, and later, after they’d made love, she lay there believing she’d told him the truth, that she did not want to end what they were doing and that it was nice. And that they should, and were, taking it slow.

But there was also the feeling that she’d lied, and it was not unlike that moment seeing Kai on his unicycle on Boston Common while holding her boyfriend’s hand, that quietly blooming dread that she was walking with the wrong boy in the wrong direction and there wasn’t much time left.

It’s like I shot my mom too. Brendan’s voice, there was so much regret in it. So much remorse. When had she ever heard that from Kai?

Only once. Those first few days of his sobriety when he would walk as lightly through the house as if he’d set trip wires for bombs and was trying to remember where he’d put them all. But only once he said to her, “I’m sorry about all that, Teresa.” And he glanced in the direction of their deck and the railing where he’d leaned over to empty all his bottles of bourbon.

But had he ever, even in a letter or a text or an email or a note on that stupid memo pad where he’d written the others, had he ever acknowledged how much he’d hurt her?

No. Not once.

Turning down her asphalt road through the woods, she feels like kicking something. She feels like taking that murky jar where she’s put all her feelings and smashing it against the Airstream where Kai is once again doing whatever he wants. Where Kai has obviously been staying when she made it clear that she wanted him away from her.

She’s driving too fast. The late-day sun is on a stand of hardwoods that even this close to her land have been spared the gypsy moths. When she slows for the turn into her long gravel driveway, she glances to her right down the even longer road that has somehow become Kai’s.

She slows to a stop. The door to her mailbox is open a few inches and there’s a cardboard box in there, though she does not remember ordering anything. She almost leaves it there, for she feels caught up in a current that has been dammed up too long, but she jerks open her car door and pulls out the box. On top of it are two or three bills and some junk mail and she slides them off and leans close and reads who sent this:

Leah Spero

Los Altos San Miguel de Batan

Matina, Limon

Costa Rica 70502

The box is light, and there’s a large decal stuck to it with more words written in Spanish. Leah’s voice on the phone whenever Terry would call that farm. She always sounded so small, even with her nearly militant pride in what she was doing, she sounded diminished and not like her Leah who had always lived loudly and with such passion for things: running harder and faster than any other girl on those hockey fields; practicing for hours in the dance studio downtown, often borrowing the key from the owner so that she could warm up earlier than the other dancers and stay later; Leah, who had her father’s olive skin and Terry’s green eyes, who was naturally gorgeous but honestly did not seem to care about that, especially once she began to study global warming and then shaved her head and began to pierce herself all over, and—two days after her eighteenth birthday—got a tattoo of the blue earth inked under her left breast.

Now she was under someone’s heavy foot the way her own mother had been for so long. And isn’t Terry still? Isn’t the love she still feels for her husband keeping her someplace closed off and static and small?

That weak night before Michael when she’d drunk too much wine then drove downtown just to see her husband’s condo. It was in that new complex on the river, five stories of tasteful shingles and iron balconies, warm light behind the panes of French doors leading out to those private decks. For over an hour Terry sat in her car in the parking lot, peering through her windshield at all the lighted windows, waiting to see her husband’s dark curly hair, waiting to see a woman with him too. But she saw hardly any people whatsoever, and she imagined them all on their couches watching television or reading the paper, and just before she was about to leave, there came the sweep of headlights and Kai’s Jeep pulling into its space only thirty feet away from her. She sank low in her seat, and she watched him walk to the front glass door of his new home, and he was walking so lightly, like a man now free of some terrible burden, and she hated him.

On the short drive back home, she vowed to never do that again. She would not be the one to go to him.

You can do it, I know you can. All those years, Terry had taken that half-smile as his faith in her, as his belief that she could do hard and challenging things. But no, it was his way of making her do what he wanted her to do without even raising his voice.

Just like Ted is doing to Leah.

Just like fucking Ted.

At her house, Terry leaves her bag and purse in the car so that she can carry in her mail and the box from Leah. But covering the ground are hundreds of bits of young green leaves, and it’s like seeing again her first abused toddler years ago. Those wonderfully new arms and legs bruised and cut and burned.

Up in the stripped branches of the big oak near her house are so many slowly crawling caterpillars that it looks like a rippling brown skin, and even down here she can hear them steadfastly chewing, chewing, chewing.

The fuckers.

Terry rests Leah’s box and the mail on her granite step and hurries around to the corner of the house and uncoils the hose. She turns the faucet all the way to the right, the hose stiffening with water, and she switches the nozzle to jet and aims it at the first caterpillar she sees, a fat straggler only about five feet up the oak’s trunk. She squeezes the nozzle’s handle and the water sprays loudly at the jagged bark just under the gypsy, and then she raises the stream and that piece-of-shit parasite is carried off into all those butchered green leaves on the ground.

Terry aims the nozzle higher, the water spray slapping a lower branch and two or three more gypsy caterpillars shooting off and away. She yanks the hose closer and aims higher and she gets a few more, but there are so many, and she will never get them all.

She drops the hose and walks fast to where three of them have fallen, these two-eyed furry creatures who are already crawling their way back to the oak. She stomps the one closer to her and then the other and the other, and she can feel the soft mush of them under her shoe, but this all feels so futile and too late.

One evening long after midnight, Kai still trying to talk Terry into sleeping with other men, she stood and said, “It’s tired, I’m late” when she meant to say, “It’s late, I’m tired.” But now, carrying Leah’s box into the house and setting it on the kitchen counter, Terry’s own words are in her head like a fragment from some lingering dream, and as she finds a knife and slits open the packing tape, Terry knows that she is late. She is so very late in doing something she should have done a long time ago.

She sets down the knife and opens the cardboard flaps. Nestled in a bed of straw is a folded sheet of paper over a sealed plastic bag with something yellow in it. She unfolds the paper, and in Leah’s careful penmanship, is written:

I grew these for you, Mom. (They’re mangos, but I had to dry them to send them in the mail.) I hope you enjoy them. Love, Leah

P.S. I may be coming home soon.

Not we may be coming soon, but I.

Terry opens the sealed plastic bag and pulls out what looks like a long, damp potato chip. But it’s a deep yellow and smells like someplace far away from here, and without washing it Terry bites off the end of it. It’s thick and surprisingly sweet and she carries it out to the deck and eats it slowly while staring out at the floodplain through the pines.

This close to sundown the cordgrass is a soft, golden bed, and she thinks of all that salt marsh behind her patient Frances’s house. Terry needs to make some calls and get her somewhere better, and she needs to contact Mandi Pham’s doctor about her blood pressure. But Leah “may be coming home soon,” and it is hard to think of much else.

The two of them spending some real time with one another—sharing meals, maybe walking together through the woods, perhaps sitting side-by-side on the sofa with glasses of wine. And Terry thinks of what she told Phyllis this morning, that maybe she’d been too hard on her daughter.

But why?

Terry stops chewing. Her face warms and she can feel the dried mango in her mouth, this delicious gift sent by her only daughter whose strength and intelligence and independence Terry had tried to squeeze out of her the way Kai had so stealthily squeezed it out of her: Leah and her piercings and tattoo and shaved head, her too-tight clothes and noncommittal sexuality, her deep need to change the world, to save it, it was just too much for her mother to see: that it was possible to be a woman in Kai Spero’s home who did not do what he wanted just because he wanted it.

And yet, here Leah was letting Ted do just that. Yes, Leah had somehow shrugged off her father, and yes, she had ignored all Terry’s nagging commands to do this and don’t do that, and yes, since she was very young Leah seemed to strive to live a free and vigorous life, but she had also spent her childhood living in this very house and taking in as surely as air how to live as a minor character in the more compelling story of the major character, who was not, nor ever would be, her.

A hot twisting in Terry’s stomach. She rests the dried mango on the railing. She zips her leather jacket to her throat and walks through her empty house and out the front door.

There’s the tick, tick, ticking sound of all that decimation, and as she gets farther down her gravel driveway, healthy birches and pines on both sides of her, she can feel her home behind her like some warm, solid mass, though she is no longer sure that she belongs there anymore. What has it become, after all, but a museum of her family when they were young and growing? What has it become but a way station where she fucks her dead friend’s husband and waits for herself to welcome her own husband back home?

Because isn’t that what she’s been doing? But why has she wanted this? What is wrong with her?

At the end of the driveway, a man on a bicycle pedals by. He’s in a helmet and sunglasses, and he does not even glance in her direction as he passes by.

How many of her patients over the years, men especially, have not even looked at her as she took their temperature or listened to their hearts, as she adjusted their IV bags or checked their blood pressure? Sometimes it was shame, the shame of having to have someone else take care of them when all their lives until now they’d taken care of themselves. There seemed to be resentment about that, and many of them, in one way or another, would show her how much they resented her—a snide remark about her cold hands or incompetence, or a look that dismissed her entirely. But there was something else too. The feeling Terry often got that they looked at her as if this was all she was.

She’d become so good at this work over the years, that whether it was an old man or an old woman, or whether it was someone as young as Mandi or Brendan, what they saw when they looked at her was a woman whose sole purpose was to care for them.

But Michael did not look at her that way, and that was the problem. He had come along too soon, right before Terry was beginning to see clearly, and then everything got too comfortable and opaque and it was like being on a boat rushing along on some dark current that then drifts into an eddy where everything stops.

She’s across the street now and walking fast down the long gravel road leading to the Airstream. The sun is low in the trees, and there are the smells of pine and what has to be damp burlap. The air is cooler than it’s been all day, and she wishes she grabbed one of her warmer jackets. She wishes she wasn’t wearing this gift from Kai.

His Jeep is parked alongside a row of tree stumps, and there he is, sitting on the Airstream’s steps cradling a glass of red wine. Beside him is a half-empty bottle, and he’s looking straight at her as if she walks over to see him every day. He’s not wearing a shirt, though he has to be cold, and his jeans are faded, the knees dark with what looks like mud. He smiles at her. “Hello, Teresa.”

“So you’re drinking again?”

The smile stays on his face, but his eyes darken with that old disappointment in her, she who could never grasp the complexities of things. “Just wine.” He lifts the bottle. “Have a glass.”

Whatever drove her to where she is standing seems to be seeping out of her. But then she sees, about ten feet from the Airstream, a mound of drowned caterpillars, hundreds of them. “It would’ve been nice if you’d done that for my trees too, Kai.”

“Your trees?”

“Don’t say it. Don’t you fucking say it.”

“Why so angry?” His tone is sincere but edged with fatigue, and she walks over and yanks the wine bottle off the step. “You forget all the damage you did with this, Kai? Or do you just not give a shit?”

“Wine is not bourbon—”

“Stop talking to me like I’m a child. And how could you do that to Leah? How could you turn your back on her like that? You don’t think that hurts her? You don’t think you’ve hurt—” Terry turns and walks quickly to the mound of dead caterpillars and empties the bottle over their wet bodies.

“Feel better?”

“No, I don’t, and you—” Her throat closes up and she throws the wine bottle as hard as she can into the trees. There’s the plink of it hitting a trunk and everything blurs and she wipes her eyes on the sleeve of her jacket that Kai surprised her with in Rome one afternoon after they’d made love and she walked out of the bathroom and there it was on the bed and Kai was lying naked on his side with a smile that could only come from his love for her and only her.

Why haven’t you ever apologized to me, Kai?

That’s all she wants to ask him, but the words won’t come out of her without tears, and she hates herself for just standing there shaking her head back and forth.

He’s up and walking toward her. His chest hair is gray when it had always been dark, and she’s letting him get close enough to hold her, her cheek against his neck that she can smell, his smell—some sage-scented wood deep in his blood—he pulls her closer, but it’s a mistake to put her arms around him because her bare hands are on his bare back, and she can feel that long-held heat descend and open inside her like the parting of curtains in a window that she has not opened in so long, even with Michael, because even warm and attentive Michael Ford cannot lead her to a place that will never belong to him, and when Kai takes her face in his hands and kisses her closed eyes and then her mouth, it is as if they have never been apart, and a muffled whimper comes from her and in it she can hear how much she has longed for this again. But Kai’s tongue tastes like wine and she hears Michael’s voice in her head, No problemo. I’ll call you tomorrow, and she pulls away and drops her hands and steps back. “I’m with Michael now.”

“I know you are, Teresa.” Kai’s looking at her with the softened eyes of someone who has already drunk half a bottle of wine, but he’s also on the verge of a smile, though this one is different. This one says, I knew you’d come. I knew you would. And look how, except for those two notes on her memo pad over a year ago, and except for waiting for her at her car at Sandy’s funeral, he has left it to her to come to him.

“Don’t you see, kookla?”

“Don’t call me that.”

“Here you are with Ford and here I am, but can you feel how strong it still is with us? Maybe even stronger, wouldn’t you say?”

Kai’s voice is in the slightly higher register it finds whenever he’s on the verge of some inarguable conclusion, and again, she almost feels sorry for him. But what she feels more than anything is a marrow-deep exhaustion and she needs to sit down. She turns toward the Airstream, but she will not go in there. She will not go where Kai fucked Barbara Fields.

She sits on the steps, and Kai picks up his glass of wine and sits beside her. He begins to put his arm around her, but she leans away, and he pulls his arm back.

They sit quietly a moment. She can feel his thigh against hers, the muddy knee of his jeans touching the cotton fabric of her sensible work pants. For a moment, this image is an assault: she, the conforming bore with a job she doesn’t even need, and he so wonderfully dirty and authentic and free. But then she can feel the lingering presence of the women and men she tended to today: ninety-one-year-old Phyllis and her fast-healing hip, her wish for Terry to be with her husband again; Earl dying in the care of two women he has hurt, but they’re caring for him anyway; legless, obese Mandi Pham and her desperate need for love from a man who’ll probably never give it to her; Frances, who even in her lostness has not lost her love for Dolly; Gerald Byrne, this former beacon living alone in a pristine house with no signs of anything in it other than affluence and past accomplishments; and Brendan, so sensitive and bewildered yet still trying to find a way to want to stay on this earth with the rest of us. Yes, she may not need this job, but isn’t she at the very least out there trying to help? What is Kai doing?

He looks off into the last light in the trees and sips from his glass of wine, and this pisses her off. Not so much that he’s drinking again, for part of her simply does not care what he does to himself now, but that he can sit quietly beside her like this after so long as if he already knows all the details of her new life and does not need to ask her one thing. As if he does not owe her any explanations of any kind.

“Being with Michael’s been good for me. Do you want to know why?”

“If you want to tell me.”

She’s about to tell him that Michael Ford has shown her what being loved is really like, that she never knew this before because Kai only knows how to love himself. But sitting here beside him on the steps of their temporary shelter when they were young, his bare shoulder touching hers through the leather of her jacket, she feels as if she’s come home after a long trip away and she’s missed this home so very much, but she knows too that it will never be hers again. What does it matter whether she tells Kai that he has no idea how to love another human being?

“I have this patient. He reminds me of you. When you were young, anyway. He’s strange and intense, and a few months ago he shot himself in the chest with his stepfather’s gun.”

Kai sips his wine.

“And today, after our walk, he told me how bad he feels about that. He hurt himself, but he knows that he hurt his mother even more.” Terry can still hear through her stethoscope the beating of Brendan’s young and healthy heart, and how horrible it was of that boy to turn a gun on that. How despicable, really.

“I really did feel so alive with you, Kai. I shouldn’t have, but I did. I think I would’ve kept going if you hadn’t ruined it all.” She can feel his eyes on her, but she won’t turn to him. He’s too close, and if she sees anything but regret in his expression she will hate him for the rest of her life. “It’s like you shot me in the chest, Kai. Can’t you see that?”

“I was trying to make us stronger, Teresa.”

“Oh, shut up.” She turns to him. He’s looking at her, but what has her attention are the small pouches under his eyes, the flesh beneath his chin beginning to sag. And also that he’s clean-shaven, which makes her think that he’s going to see a new woman later, or even a couple. “Just tell me you’re sorry, Kai. Just tell me you’re sorry for hurting me.”

“I can’t make you feel anything. That’s up to you.”

A sickening heat blooms in her chest and she cannot get away from him fast enough. She’s standing and facing him, and he’s smiling up at her. He’s actually fucking smiling.

“You’re a bad person, Kai. You’re not good for anyone.”

“I miss you, Teresa. I know you miss me too.”

She sticks her hands into her jacket pockets. A squirrel darts under Kai’s Jeep. It’s parked right where she had sex with Norman Fields in his car, and she looks over at all those drowned caterpillars, and if she ever felt more alone in her life she does not know when. “Maybe I do miss you. But you probably miss your bourbon too, which doesn’t mean you should go back to it.”

He looks like he’s about to say something to that but doesn’t. He’s looking at her from her face to her shoes like she’s an image he needs to commit to memory, some past object of desire he senses he will now have to put on a shelf.

“It’s time for lawyers, Kai.”

“Not for us, kookla.”

“And if you don’t leave these woods then I will.”

She turns and starts walking. He’s saying something behind her, something about her making a mistake. But for once, his tone is not patronizing. Instead, in it is genuine surprise edged with maybe a dawning concern that perhaps his conclusion is wrong, that what he thought he had made stronger had in fact fallen apart.

Her hands are deep in her jacket pockets, and she crosses the empty street and walks fast up her gravel driveway. She knows she needs to call Michael and tell him she’s through. It will hurt him, and she does not want to do that, but it must be done. If she is going to have any clarity on anything, it must be done.

Another light sweat has broken out under her clothes, and when she sees the bed of broken green leaves at the base of her oak she stops and stares at it, for it’s lovely, really. If you don’t know what you’re looking at, it’s lovely.

Her first patient to die was a young woman. She had thick red hair and freckled cheekbones, and she lay under a sheet on that gurney looking like someone taking a nap before receiving important guests, not this nineteen-year-old girl who had taken every one of her father’s sleeping pills.

Terry avoids looking up at the stripped branches, for her own house in front of her has also brought that girl back to her, her house with its bleached shingles and big-paned windows, with its steep gabled roof and stone chimney, with its granite steps leading to a door her husband hung himself; it could be the happy home for any number of happy families, but what made it that is gone.

She steps inside and closes the door behind her. The house is quiet. There are the familiar smells of carpets and dust. There are the wooden floors of the hallway, her living room with its books and abstract art, her deep sofa. There is her kitchen and the big window over the sink, and there, on the deck railing under the last of the sun, is Leah’s dried mango. It feels so wrong to have abandoned her daughter’s gift like that. Why did she do that?

Terry’s walking quickly down the hall now, for she must finish eating it, and then she will call Leah and she’ll thank her. She’ll ask her if she needs help with a flight back home, though that word seems to fly away inside Terry like some winged creature, and as she reaches the deck, she imagines her and Leah at a café table in France or Italy or maybe Santa Monica, Nicholas there too.

On the strip of mango are a dozen scurrying ants. Terry hesitates for a moment but then wipes them off and sticks the sweet fruit into her mouth. She chews it slowly and looks out at the cordgrass. It is the color of cooling embers, and it’s as if she’s standing in a memory that has been fixed in time. A shiver moves through her, not from the coming dusk and the cold air rising up from the floodplain through the trees, but from what she knows she must now do, which is to shed this house and this land like an old and no longer needed skin.